---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: The Fifth Principle expounded
author: "[[William Perkins]]"
parent: "[[Six Principles]]"
publisher: "[[Banner of Truth]]"
tags:
  - resources/Puritans
---

# The Fifth Principle expounded

Q. _What outward means must we use to obtain faith, and all the blessings of God which come by faith?_ A. The preaching of God’s word, and the administration of the sacraments, and prayer. “Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.” – Prov. 29:18; “How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?” – Rom. 10:14; “Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen.” – Matt. 28:19,20; “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:” – 2 Tim. 3:16. Q. _Where is the word of God to be found?_ A. The whole word of God needful to salvation is set down in the holy Scriptures. Q. _How know you that the Scriptures are the word of God, and not men’s policies?_ A. I am assured of it: first, because the Holy Ghost persuadeth my conscience that it is soa; secondly, I see it by experience, for the preaching of the Scripturesb have the power of God in them to humble a man when they are preached, and to cast him down to hell, and afterward to restore and raise him up again. a “In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise” – Eph. 1:13. b “For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.” – Heb. 4:12; “And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.” – 1 Cor. 14:25. Q. _What is the use of the word of God preached?_ A. First, it breedeth, and then it increaseth faith in them which are chosen to salvation; but unto them that perish, it is by reason of their corruption, an occasion of their further damnation. “For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.” – Rom. 1:17; “To the one we are the savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who is sufficient for these things?” – 2 Cor. 2:16; “For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.” – Heb. 4:2. Q._How must we hear God’s word, that it may be effectual to salvation?_ A. We must come unto it with hunger-bitten hearts, having an appetite to the word; we must mark it with attention, receive it by faith, submit ourselves unto it with fear and trembling, even then when our faults are reproved; lastly we must hide it in the corners of our hearts, that we may frame our lives and conversations by it. “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath” – Jam. 1:19; “And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.” – Acts 16:14; “For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.” – Heb. 4:2; “For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.” – Isa. 66:2; “And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.” – Luke 2:51; “Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.” – Psa. 119:11. Q. _What is a sacrament?_ A. A sign to represent, a seal to confirm, an instrument to convey Christ and all his benefits to them that do believe in him. “And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also” – Rom. 4:11; “And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.” – Gen. 17:11; “O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?” – Gal. 3:1. Q. _Why must a sacrament represent the mercies of God before our eyes?_ A. Because we are dull to conceive and to remember them. Q. _Why do the sacraments seal unto us the mercies of God?_ A. Because we are full of unbelief, and doubting of them. Q. _Why is the sacrament the instrument of the Spirit to convey the mercies of God into our hearts?_ A. Because we are like Thomas; we will not believe till we feel them in some measure in our hearts. Q. _How many sacraments are there?_ A. Two and no more: Baptism, by which we have our admission into the true church of God; and the Lord’s Supper, by which we are nourished and preserved in the true church after our admission. “Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat” – 1 Cor. 10:1-3. Q. _What is done in baptism?_ A. In the assembly of the church, the Covenant of grace between God and the party baptised is solemnly confirmed and sealed. “Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” – Acts 2:38; “Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost” – Tit. 3:5; “And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.” – Acts 22:16; “Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost” – Matt. 28:19. Q._In this Covenant, what doth God promise to the party baptised?_ A. Christ, with all blessings that come by him. “For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.” – Gal. 3:27; “The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ” – 1 Pet. 3:21. Q._To what condition is the party baptised bound?_ A. To receive Christ and to repent of his sin. “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.” – Mark 16:16. Q. _What meaneth the sprinkling or dipping in water?_ A. It seals unto us remission of sins, and sanctification by the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ. “Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.” – 1 Pet. 1:2. Q. _How cometh it to pass that many after their baptism for a long time feel not the effect and fruit of it, and some never?_ A. The fault is not in God, who keeps his covenants, but the fault is in themselves, in that they do not keep the condition of the Covenant, to receive Christ by faith, and to repent of all their sins. Q. _When shall a man then see the effect of his baptism?_ A. At what time soever he doth receive Christ by faith, though it be many years after, he shall then feel the power of God to regenerate him, and to work all things in him, which he offered in baptism. “By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.” – Heb. 10:10; “The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ” – 1 Pet. 3:21. Q. _How if a man never keep the condition to which he bound himself in baptism?_ A. His damnation shall be the greater because he breaketh his vow made to God. “When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee. But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.” – Deut. 23:21,22; “When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.” – Eccl. 5:4. Q. _What is done in the Lord’s Supper?_ A. The former Covenant solemnly ratified in baptism is renewed in the Lord’s Supper, between the Lord himself and the receiver. “For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.” – 1 Cor. 11:23,24; “For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.” – 1 Cor. 12:13. Q. _Who is the receiver?_ A. Every one that hath been baptised, and after his baptism hath truly believed in Christ and repented of his sins from his heart. “But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.....For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.”– 1 Cor. 11:28,31; “Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” – Matt. 5:23,24; “For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word. He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine’s blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.” – Isa. 66:2,3. Q. _What meaneth the bread and wine, the eating of the bread and the drinking of the wine?_ A. These outward actions are a second seal set by the Lord’s own hand unto his Covenant. And they do give every receiver to understand that as God doth bless the bread and wine, to preserve and strengthen the body of the receiver, so Christ apprehended and received by faith shall nourish him and preserve both body and soul unto eternal life. “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.” – 1 Cor. 10:16,17. Q. _What shall a true believer feel in himself after the receiving of the sacrament?_ A. The increase of his faith in Christ, the increase of sanctification, a greater measure of dying to sin, a greater care to live in newness of life. “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.” – 1 Cor 10:16,17; “And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.” – 1 Cor. 11:24. Q. _What if a man after the receiving of the sacrament, never find any such thing in himself?_ A. He may well suspect himself whether he did ever repent or not; and thereupon is to use means to come to sound faith and repentance. Q. _What is another means of increasing faith?_ A. Prayer. Q. _What is prayer?_ A. A familiar speech with Goda in the name of Christ, in which we either crave things needful or give thanks for things receivedb. a “And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us” – 1 John 5:14. b “I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men” – 1 Tim. 2:1; “Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.” – Phil. 4:6. Q._In asking things needful, what is required?_ A. Two things: an earnest desire and faith. Q. _What things must a Christian man’s heart desire?_ A. Six things especially. “Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.” – Mark 11:24. Q. _What are they?_ A. 1. That he may glorify Goda. 2. That God may reign in his heart and not sinb. 3. That he may do God’s will and not the lusts of his fleshc. 4. That he may rely himself on God’s providence for all the means of this temporal lifed. 5. That he may be justified and be at peace with Gode. 6. That by the power of God he may be strengthened against all temptationsf. a 1st petition. b 2nd petition. c 3rd petition. d 4th petition. e 5th petition. f 6th petition. Q. _What is faith?_ A. A persuasion that those things which we truly desire, God will grant them for Christ’s sake. Amen.
