---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: DIRECTION I.
author: "[[Walter Marshall]]"
parent: "[[The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification Opened]]"
publisher: "[[Banner of Truth]]"
tags:
  - resources/Chapel
link: https://www.chapellibrary.org/spanish
---

DIRECTION I.

That wp njay acceptably perform the duties of Holiness, and Might, eousness required m the law, our first work is, to learn the now. urful and effectual means whereby we may attain to so great an end.

EXPLICATION.

\ • ■ • ■

Tms direction raay serve instead of a preface, to prepare the understanding and attention of the reader for those that follow. And,

Eirst, It acquainteth you \yith the great end, for which all those means are designed that are the principal subject to be here treated of. Tlte^ca^eSlf-AlLisy to teach you how., s you. may attain to that practice and manner of liFe which we call holiness, righteousness, or godliness, obedience, true religion; and which God requireth of us in the law particularly in the moral law, summed up in the ten commandments, and more briefly in these two great commandments of love to Godnnd our neigh' hour, Mat xxii. 37, 39. And more largely explained throughout the hobj scriptures. My work is, to shew how the duties of this law may be done, when they are known: therefore expect not that I should delay my intent, to help you to the knowledge of them, by any large exposition of them; which is a work already performed in several catechisms and commentaries. Yet, that you may not miss the mark, for want of discerning it, take notice, in a few words, that the holiness"which I would bring you to is spiritual, Rom. vii. 14. It con• sists not only in external works of piety and charity, but o> in the holy thoughts, imaginations, and affections of die soul, and chiefly in love; from whence all other .good works must flow, or else they are not acceptable to God, not only in refraining the execution of sinful lusts, but in longing and delighting to do the will of God» and in a cheerful obedience to God, without repining, fretting, grudging at any duty, as if it were a grievous, yoke and burden to you.

Take notice further, that the law, which is your mark, is exceeding broad, Psa. cxix. 9S; and yet not the more easy to be hit; because you must aim to hit it, in every duty of it, with a performance of equal breadth, or else you. cannot hit it at all, Jam. ii. 10. The Lord is not at all loved with that love that is due to him as Lord of all, if he be not loved with all our heart, spirit, and might. We are to love every thing in him, his justice, holiness, sovereign authority, all-seeing eye, and all his decrees, commands, judgments, and all his doings. We are to love him, net only better than other things, but singly, as only good, the fountain of all goodness; and to reject all fleshly and worldly enjoyments, even our own lives, as if We hated them, when they stand in competition with our enjoyment of him, or our duty towards him. We must love him so as to yield ourselves wholly up to his constant service in all things, and to his disposal of us, as our absolute Lord, w hether it be for prosperity or adversity, life or death. And, for his sake, we are to love our neighbour, even all men, whether they be friends or foes to us; and so do to them in all tilings, that coacerueth their honour, life, chastity, worldly wealth,-credit, and content, whatever we would that men should do to us in the like condition, Mat. vii. 12. This spiritual universal obedience is the great end, to the attainment whereof I am directing _you. And that you may not reject mine enterprize as impossible, observe, that the most I promise is no more than an acceptable performance of those duties of the law, such as our gracious merciful God will certainly delight in, and be pleased with, during our state of imperfection in this world, and such as will end in perfection of holiness, and all happiness in the world to come. "■''

Before I proceed further, stay your thotights a while in the contemplation of the great dignity and excellency of these duties of the law, that you may aim at the performance of them, as your end, with so high an esteem, as may cast an amiable lustre upon the ensuing discovery of the means. The principal duties of love, to God above all, and to each other, for his sake, from ■whence all the other duties Sow are. so excellent, that I cannot imagine any more noble work for the holy angels in their glorious sphere. They are the chief works for which we were first framed in the image of God, engraved upon man in the first creation, and for which that beautiful image is renewed upon us in our new creation and sanctifi cation by Jesus Christ, and shall be perfected in our glorification. They are works which depend not merely on the sovereignty of the will' of God, to be commanded or forbidden, or left indifFerent, or changed, or abolished at his pleasure, as other works that belong either to the judicial or ceremonial law, or to the means of salvation prescribed by the gospel; but they are, in their own nature, holy, just, and good, Rom. vii* 12; and meet for us to perform, because of our natural relation to our Creator and fellow creatures ; so that they will have an inseparable dependence upon the holiness and will of God, and an indispensable establishment thereby. They are works sufficient to render the performers holy in all manner of conversation, by the fruits which they bring forth, if no other duties had ever been commanded; and by which the performace of all other duties is sufficiently established as soon a* they are commanded; and without which, there can. be no holiness of heart and life imagined; and to which it was one great honour of Mosaical, and is now of evangelical ordinances, to be subservient for the performance of them, as means which shall cease when their end,thisjiever-failing charity, is perfectly attained, 1 Cor. xiii. They are duties which we were naturally, obliged to, by that reason and understanding which God gave to man at his first creation, to discern what was just and meet for him to do, and to which even heathens are still obliged, by the light of nature, with out any written law, or supernatural revelation, Rom. iv. 14,15. Therefore they are called natural religion i and the law that requireth them, is called the natural larv, and also the moral law; because the manners of all men, infidels as well as christians, ought to be conformed to it, (and, if they had been fully conformable, they would not have come short of eternal happiness, Mat. v. 19; Luke x. 27, 28.) under the penalty of the wrath of God for the violation of it. This is the true morality which God approveth of, consisting in a conformity of all our actions to the moral law. And, iff those that in these days, contend so highly for mortality, do understand no other than this, I dare join with them in asserting, that the best morally honest man is the greatest saint; and that morality is the principal part of true religion, and the rest of all other parts, without which faith is dead, and all other religious performances are a vain shew, and mere hypocrisy. For the faithful and true witness hath testified, concerning the two great moral commandments of love to God, and our neighbour, that there is none other commandment greater than these, and that on them "hang ail the law and the prophets," Mat. xxii. 36—iO. Mark xii. 31.

Tht second thing contained in this introductory direction is the necessity of learning the po werful and efFectual means, whereby this' great and excellent end may be accomplished, and of making this the first work to be done, before we can expect success in any attempt for the attainment of it.

This is an advertisement very needful; because many are ant to skip over ihe lesson concerning the means (that will fill up this whole treatise) as superfluous and useless. When once they know the nature and excellency of the duties of the law, they account nothing wanting but diligent performance; and they rush blindly upon immediate practice, making more haste than good speed. They are quick in promising, Kxod. xix. •8. "all that the Lord hath spoken we will do," without sitting down and counting the cost. They look upon holine_ss_as only .the means of an end of eternal salvation^ not as an end itself requireth any great means for attaining the practice of it. The inquiry of most, when they begin to have a sense of religion, is, "what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life?" Mat xix. 19; not, how shall I be enabled to do any thing that is good? Yea, many that are accounted powerful preachers, spend all their zeal in the earnest pressing die immediate practice of the law, without any discovery of the effectual means of performance : as if the works of righteousness were like those servile employments that need no skill and artifice at all, but industry and activity. That you may not stumble at the threshold of a religious life, by this common oversight, I shall endeavour to make you sensible, that it is not enough for you to know the matter and reason of your duty, but that you are also to leam the powerful and effectual means of per- formance, before you can successfully apply yourselves to immediate practice. And, for this end, I shall lay before you die considerations following. ;^ 1st. We are all, by nature, void of all strength and ability to perform acceptably that holiness and righteousness which the law requireth, and are "dead in trespasses and sins," and "children of wrath," by the sin of our first father, Adam, as the scripture witnesseth, Rom. v. 12,15,18,19. Eph. ii. 1, 2, 3. Rom. viii. 7, 8. This doctrine to original sin, which Protestants generally profess, is a firm basis and ground-work to the assertion now to be proved, and to many other assertions in this whole discourse. If we believe it to be true, we cannot rationally encourage ourselves to attempt a holy practice, until we are acquainted with some powerful and effectual mean/5 to enable us for it. While man continued upright in the image of God, as he was at first created, Eccl. vii. 19. Gen. i. 27, he could do the will of God sincerely, as soon as he knew it; but when he was fallen, he was quickly afraid, because of his nakedness; but could not help it at all, until God discovered to him the means of restoration, Gen. iii. 10, 15. Say to a strong healthy servant, "go, and he goeth: come, and he cometh: do this, and he doeth it:" but a bed-ridden servant must know first how he may be enabled. No doubt the fallen angels knew the necessity of holiness, and trembled at the guilt of their sin: but they knew of no means for them to attain to holiness effectually, and so continue still in their wickedness. It was in vain for Sampson to say, "I will go out as at other times, and shake myself," when he had sinned away his strength, Judg. xvi. 20. Men shew themselves strangely forgetful, or hypocritical, in professing original sin in their prayers, catechisms, and confessions of faith; and yet urging upon themselves and'others the practice of the law, without the consideration of any strengthening, enlivening means: as if there were no want of ability, but only of activity.

2d. Those that doubt of, or deny the doctrine of original sin, may all of them know concerning themselves (if their consciences be not blind) that the exact justice of God is against them, and they are under the curse of God, and sentence of death, for their actual sins, if God should enter into judgment with them, Rom. i. 32. ii. 2. iii. 9. Gal. iii. 10. Is it possible for a man that knoweth this to be his case, and hath not learned any means of getting out of it, to practice the law immediately, to love God and every thing in him, his justice, holiness, and power, as well as his mercy, and to yield himself willingly to the disposals of God, chough God should inflict sudden death upon him? Is there no skill or artifice required in this case, to encourage the fainting soul to the practice of universal obedience?

3d. Though Heathens might know much of the works of the law by the common light of natural reason, and understanding, Rom. ii. 14. yet the effectual means of performance cannot be discovered by that light, and therefore are wholly to be learned by the teaching of supernatural revelation. For what is our natural light, but some sparks and glimmerings of that which was in Adam before the fall; and even then, in its brightest meridian, it was not sufficient to direct Adam, how to recover ability to walk holily, if once he should lose it by sin; nor assure him before hand, that God should vouchsafe to him any means of recovery. God had sent nothing but death before his eyes in case of transgression, Gen. ii. 17. and therefore he hid himself from God, when the shame of his nakedness appeared, as expecting no favour from him. We are like sheep gone astray, and know not which way to return, until we hear the Shepherd's voice. "Can these diy bones live" to God in holiness? "0 Lord, thou knowestand we cannot know it, except we learn it of thee.

4th. Sanctification, whereby our hearts and lives are conformed to the law, is a. grace of God, communicated to us by means, as well as justification; and by means of teaching, and learning something that we cannot see without the word, Acts xxvi. 17, 18. There are several things pertaining to life and godliness, that are given through knozvledge, 1 Pet. i. 2, 3. This is a form of doctrine niade use of by God, to make people free from sin, and servants of righteousness, Rom. vi. 17, 18; and there are several pieces of the whole armour of God necessary to be known and put on, that we may stand against sin and Satan in the evil day. Eph. vi. 13. Shall we slight and overlook the way of sanctification, when the learning the way of justification hath been accounted worth so many elaborate treatises? • ,

5th. God hath given, in the holy scriptures, by his inspiration, plentiful instruction in righteousness, "that we may be thoroughly furnished for every good work," 2 Tim. iii. 16, IT. especially since "the day-spring from on high hath visited us," by the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, " to guide our feet in the way of peace," Luke i. 78, 79. If God condescend to us so very low, to teach us this way in the scripture, and by Christ, it must needs be greatly necessary for us, to sit down at his feet and learn it.

6th. The way of attaining to godliness is so far from being known without learnmg.out of the holy scriptures, that, when it is here plainly revealed, we cannot "learn it so easily as the dutes of the law; which are known in part by the light of nature, and therefore the more easily assented to. It is the way whereby the dead are brought to live unto God ,• and therefore doubtless it is far above all the thoughts and conjectures of human wisdom. It is the way of salvation, wherein God will "destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent," by discovering things by his Spirit, that "the natural man receiveth not; for they are foolishness to him neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned," 1 Cor. i. 19. 31. and ii. 14. "without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness," 1 Tim. iii. 16. The learning of it requireth double work; because we' must unlearn many of our former deeply rooted notions, and "become fools, that we may be wise." We must pray earnestly to the Lord to teach us, as well as search the scriptures, that we may get this knowledge. "O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes ; and I shall keep it unto the end," Psal. cxix. 5, 33. "Teach me to do thy will," cxliii. lO. u The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God," 2 Thess. iii. 5.—Surely these saints did not so much want teaching and directions concerning the duties of the law to be done, as concerning the way and means whereby they might do them.

7th. The certain knowledge of these powerful and effectual means, is of greatest importance and. necessity for our establishment iu the true faith, and avoiding errors contrary thereunto; for we cannot rationally doubt, that the moral duties of love to God and our neighbour, are absolutely necessary to true religion, so that it cannot subsist without them. And, from this principle we may firmly conclude,.that nothing repugnant to the practice of. these holy duties, ought to be received as a point of faith, delivered to us by the most holy God; and that whatsoever is truly necessary, powerful, and effectual, to bring us to the practice of them, ought to be believed as proceeding from God, because it hath the image of his holiness and righteousness engraven upon it. This is a sure test and touchstone, which diose that are seriously religious will use, to try spirits and their doctrines, whether they be of. God or no; and they cannot rationally approve any doctrine as rejigious, that is not according to godliness,. 1 Tim. vi. 3.. By this touchstone Christ proveth his doctrine to be of God, because therein he seeketh the glory of God, John vii. 17, 18. And he teacheth us to know false prophets by their fruits, Mat. vii. 15, 16- wherein the fruits which their doctrine tendeth unto,are especially to be considered. Hence it appeareth, that until we know what are the effectual means of holiness, and what not,, we want a necessary touchstone of divine truth, and may be easily deceived by false doctrine, or brought to live in mere suspense concerning the truth of any religion, like the seekers. And if you mistake, and think those things-to be effectual that are not, and those that are effectual to he weak,, or of contrary effect, your error in this will be a false touchstone to try other doctrines, whereby you will readily approve of errors, and refuse the truth; which hath been a pernicious occasion of

many errors in religion in late days.—Get but a true touchstone, by learning this lesson, and you will be able to try the various doctrines of Protestants, Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Antinominians, Quakers: and to discover the truth and cleave to it, with much satisfaction to your judgment, amongst all the janglings and controversies of these times.—Hereby you may discover, whether the Protestant religion, established among us, hath in it any sinews of Antinomianism; whether it be guilty of any insufferable defect in practical principles, and deserves to be altered, and turned almost upside down, with new doctrines and methods; as some learned men, in late times, have judged by their touchstones. >

8th. It is also of great importance and necessity for Out establishment in holy practice; for we cannot apply ourselves to the practice of holiness, with hope of success, except we have some faith concerning the divine assistance ; which we have no ground- to expect, if we use not such means as God hath appointed to work by. 1,4 God meeteth these that remember him in his own ways," Isa. lfciv. 5. and "makes a breach upon them that seek him not after the due order," 1 Chron.. xv. 13. He hath chosen and ordained such means of sawetification and salvation, as are for his own glory, and those only he blesseth to us; and he crowneth no man that striveth, except he strive lawfully, 2 Tim ii. 5.

Experience sheweth plentifully, both of heathens and christians, how pernicious ignorance, or mistaking of these effectual means, is to a holy practice. The heathens generally fell short of an acceptable performance of these duties of the law which they knew, because of their ignorance in this point: 1. Many christians con• tent themselves with external performances because they never knew how they might attain to spiritual service. 2. And many reject the way of holiness as austere and unpleasant, because they knew not how to cut off a right hand, or pluck out a right eye, without intolerable pain; whereas they would find " the ways of wisdom (if they knew them) to be ways of pleasantness and all her paths peace," Prov. iii. 17. This occasioneth the putting off repentance from time to time, as an uncouth thing. 3. Many others set upon the practice of holiness with a fervent zeal, and run very fast; but tre^d not a step in the right way; and finding themselves frequently disappointed and overcome by their lusts, they at last give over the work, and turn to wallow again in the mire: which hath occasioned several treatises, to shew how far a reprobate may go in the way of religion; whereby many weak saints are discouraged, accounting that these reprobates have gone farther than themselves: whereas most of them never knew the right way, nor trode one step right in it; for, "few there be that find it." Mat. vii. 14. 4. Some of those ignorant zealots do inhumanly macerate their bodies with fasting, and other austerities, to kill their lusts; and, when they see their lusts are still too hard for them, they fall into despair, and are driven by horror of conscience, to make way with themselves wickedly, to the scandal of religion. Peradventure God may bless my discovery of the powerful means of holiness so far, as to save some one or other from killing themselves.-— And such a fruit as this would countervail my labour; though I hope, God will enlarge the hearts of many by it, to run with great cheerfulness, joy, and thanksgiving in the ways of his commandments*
