---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: The Sixth Principle expounded
author: "[[William Perkins]]"
parent: "[[Six Principles]]"
publisher: "[[Banner of Truth]]"
tags:
  - resources/Puritans
---

# The Sixth Principle expounded

Q._After that a man hath led a short life in this world, what followeth then?_ A. Death, which is the parting asunder of body and soul. Q. _Why do wicked men and unbelievers die?_ A. That their bodies may go to the earth, and their souls may be cast into hell fire. “And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.” – Luke 16:22,23. Q. _Why do the godly die, seeing Christ by death hath overcome death?_ A. They die for this end, that their bodies may rest for a while in the earth and their souls may enter into heaven immediately. “And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise.” – Luke 23:43; “And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.” – Acts 7:60; “But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.” – 1 Thess. 4:13; “ Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil” – Heb. 2:14; “Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed” – 1 Cor. 15:51. Q. _What followeth after death?_ A. The day of judgment. Q. _What sign is there to know this day from other days?_ A. Heaven and earth shall be consumed with fire immediately before the coming of the judge. “Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?” – 2 Pet. 3:11,12. Q. _Who shall be the judge?_ A. Jesus Christ the Son of God. Q. _What shall be the coming to judgment?_ A. He shall come in the clouds in great majesty and glory, with infinite company of angels. “For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” – 1 Thess. 4:16,17. Q. _How shall a man be cited to judgment?_ A. At the sound of a trumpeta, the living shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and the dead shall rise every one with his own bodyb, and all shall be gathered together before Christ; and after this the good shall be severed from the badc,these standing on the left hand of Christ, the other on the right. a “And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.” – Matt. 24:31; “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory” – Matt. 25:31; “Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.” – 1 Cor. 15:51,52. b “For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God” – Job 19:25,26. c “And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.” – Matt. 25:32,33. Q. _How will Christ try every man’s cause?_ A. The books of every man’s doings shall be laid opena, men’s consciences shall be made either to accuse them or excuse them, and every man shall be tried by the works which he did in his life time, because they are open and manifest signs of faith or unbeliefb. a “And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.” – Rev. 20:12; “A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.” – Dan. 7:10. b “He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” – John 3:18; “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.” – John 5:24. Q. _What sentence will he give?_ A. He will give sentence of salvation to the elect and godly, but will pronounce sentence of damnation against unbelievers and reprobates. “Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world....Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels” – Matt. 25:34,41. Q. _What state shall the godly be in after the day of judgment?_ A. They shall continue for ever in the highest heaven in the presence of God, having fellowship with Christ Jesus, and reigning with him for ever. “Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world” – Matt. 25:34; “And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.” – Rev. 21:2-5. Q._What state shall the wicked be in after the day of judgment?_ A. In eternal perdition and destruction in hell fire. Q. _What is that?_ A. It stands in three things especially: First, a perpetual separation from God’s comfortable presence. Secondly, fellowship with the devil and his angels. Thirdly, an horrible pang and torment both of body and soul, arising from the feeling of the whole wrath of God poured forth on the wicked for ever world without end; and if the pain of one tooth for one day be so great, endless shall be the pain of the whole man, body and soul for ever. “Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power” – 2 Thess. 1:9; “And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.” – Isa. 66:24; “But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.” – Rev. 21:8.
