---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: Introduction—Explanation of terms.
author: "[[Jonathan Edwards]]"
parent: "[[The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Volume One]]"
publisher: "[[CCEL]]"
year: 2002
tags:
  - resources/CCEL
---

# Introduction—Explanation of terms.

###### A

### INTRODUCTION

CONTAINING EXPLANATIONS OF TERMS AND GENERAL POSITION

To avoid all confusion in our inquiries concerning the end for which God created the world, a distinction should be observed between the _chief _end for which an agent performs any work, and the _ultimate_ end. These two phrases are not always precisely of the same signification: and though the _chief _end be always an _ultimate_ end, yet every ultimate end is not always a chief end. A _chief_ end is opposite to an _inferior_ end: an _ultimate_ end is opposite to a _subordinate _end.

A _subordinate _end is what an agent aims at, not at all upon its own account, but wholly on the account of a _further _end, of which it is considered as a means. Thus when a man that goes a journey to obtain a medicine to restore his health, the obtaining of that medicine is his subordinate end; because it is not an end that he values at all upon its own account, but wholly as a means of a further end, _viz_. his health. Separate the medicine from that further end, and it is not at all desired.

An _ultimate_ end is that which the agent seeks, in what he does, for its _own_ sake; what he loves, values, and takes pleasure in on its own account, and not merely as a means of a further end. As when a man loves the taste of some particular sort of fruit, and is at pains and cost to obtain it, for the sake of the pleasure of that taste which he values upon its own account, as he loves his own pleasure; and not merely for the sake of any other good, which he supposes his enjoying that pleasure will be the means of.

Some ends are subordinate, not only as they are subordinated to an ultimate end; but also to another end that is itself but subordinate. Yea, there may be a succession or chain of many subordinate ends, one dependent on another, one sought for another; before you come to any thing that the agent aims at, and seeks for its _own_ sake. As when a man sells a garment to get money—to buy tools—to till his land—to obtain a crop—to supply him with food—to gratify the appetite. And he seeks to gratify his appetite, on its _own_ account, as what is grateful in itself. Here the end of his selling his garment to get money, is only a subordinate end; and it is not only subordinate to the _ultimate_ end—gratifying his appetite—but to a _nearer_ end—buying husbandry tools; and his obtaining these is only a subordinate end, being only for the sake of tilling land. And the tillage of land is an end not sought on its own account, but for the sake of the crop to be produced; and the crop produced is an end sought only for the sake of making bread; and bread is sought for the sake of gratifying the appetite.

Here gratifying the appetite is called the _ultimate_ end; because it is the _last_ in the chain where a man’s aim rests, obtaining in that the thing finally aimed at. So whenever a man comes to that in which his desire terminates and rests, it being something valued on its _own_ account, then he comes to an _ultimate_ end, let the chain be longer or shorter; yea, if there be but one link or one step that he takes before he comes to this end. As when a man that loves honey puts it into his mouth, for the sake of the pleasure of the taste, without aiming at any thing further. So that an end which an agent has in view, may be both his _immediate_ and his _ultimate_ end; his _next_ and his _last_ end. That end which is sought for the sake of itself, and not for the sake of a further end, is an ultimate end; there the aim of the agent stops and rests.

A thing sought may have the nature of an ultimate, and also of a subordinate end; as it may be sought partly on its own account, and partly for the sake of a further end. Thus a man, in what he does, may seek the love and respect of a particular person, partly on its own account, because it is in itself agreeable to men to be the objects of others’ esteem and love; and partly, because he hopes, through the friendship of that person, to have his assistance in other affairs; and so to be put under advantage for obtaining further ends.

A _chief_ end, which is opposite to an _inferior_ end, is something diverse from an ultimate end; it is most valued, and therefore most sought after by the agent in what he does. It is evident, that to be an end more valued than another end, is not exactly the same thing as to be an end valued _ultimately_, or for its own sake. This will appear, if it be considered,

1. That two different ends may be both ultimate, and yet not be chief ends. They may be both valued for their _own_ sake, and both sought in the same work or acts; and yet one valued more highly, and sought more than another. Thus a man may go a journey to obtain two different benefits or enjoyments, both which may be agreeable to him in _themselves_ considered; and yet one may be much more agreeable than the other; and so be what he sets his heart _chiefly_ upon. Thus a man may go a journey, partly to obtain the possession and enjoyment of a bride that is very dear to him; and partly to gratify his curiosity in looking in a telescope, or some new-invented and extraordinary optic glass; and the one not properly subordinate to the other; and therefore _both_ may be _ultimate_ ends. But yet obtaining his beloved bride may be his _chief_ end; and the benefit of the optic glass his _inferior_ end.

2. An ultimate end is not always the chief end, because some subordinate ends may be _more_ valued and sought after than some _ultimate_ ends. Thus, for instance, a man may aim at two things in his journey; one, to visit his friends, and another, to receive a large sum of money. The latter may be but a subordinate end; he may not value the silver and gold on their _own_ account, but only for pleasure, gratification, and honour; the money is valued only as a means of the other. But yet, obtaining the money may be _more_ valued, and so is a _higher_ end of his journey than the pleasure of seeing his friends; though the latter is valued on its _own_ account, and so is an _ultimate_ end.

But here several things may be noted:

_First_, When it is said, that some _subordinate_ ends may be _more_ valued than some _ultimate_ ends, it is not supposed that ever a subordinate end is more valued than _that_ to which it is subordinate. For that reason it is called a _subordinate_ end, because it is valued and sought not for its own sake, but only in subordination to a _further_ end. But yet a subordinate end may be valued more than some _other_ ultimate end that it is not subordinate to. Thus, for instance, a man goes a journey to receive a sum of money, only for the value of the pleasure and honour that the money may be a means of. In this case it is impossible that the _subordinate_ end, _viz._ his having the money, should be _more_ valued by him than the pleasure and honour for which he values it. It would be absurd to suppose that he values the means more than the end, when he has no value for the means, but for the sake of the end of which it is the means. But yet he may value the money, though but a subordinate end, _more_ than some _other ultimate_ end to which it is not subordinate, and with which it has no connexion. For instance, _more_ than the comfort of a friendly visit, which was one ultimate end of his journey.

_Secondly_, The ultimate end is always _superior_ to its subordinate end, and more valued by the agent, unless it be when the ultimate end entirely depends on the subordinate. If he has no other means by which to obtain his last end, then the subordinate may be _as much_ valued as the last end; because the last end, in such a case, altogether depends upon, and is wholly and certainly conveyed by it. As for instance, if a pregnant woman has a peculiar appetite to a certain rare fruit that is to be found only in the garden of a particular friend of hers, at a distance—and she goes a journey to her friend’s house or garden, to obtain that fruit—the _ultimate_ end of her journey is to gratify that strong appetite; the obtaining that fruit, is the _subordinate_ end of it. If she looks upon it, that the appetite can be gratified by _no other_ means than the obtaining of that fruit; and that it will _certainly_ be gratified if she obtain it, then she will value the fruit as much as she values the gratification of her appetite. But otherwise, it will not be so. If she be _doubtful_ whether that fruit will satisfy her craving, then she will not value it _equally_ with the gratification of her appetite itself. Or if there be some _other fruit_ that she knows of, that will gratify her desire, at least _in part_, which she can obtain without such trouble as shall countervail the gratification—or if her appetite cannot be gratified without this fruit, nor yet with it _alone_, without something else to be compounded with it—then her _value_ for her last end will be _divided_ between these several ingredients as so many subordinate ends, and no _one alone_ will be equally valued with the last end. Hence it rarely happens, that a subordinate end is _equally_ valued with its last end; because the obtaining of a last end rarely depends on _one_ single, uncompounded means, and infallibly connected with it. Therefore, men’s _last_ ends are _commonly_ their _highest_ ends.

_Thirdly_, If any being has but _one_ ultimate end, in all that he does, and there be a great variety of operations, his _last_ end may justly be looked upon as his _supreme_ end. For in such a case, _every other_ end but that one, is in order to that end; and therefore no other can be superior to it. Because, as was observed before, a subordinate end is never _more_ valued than the end to which it is subordinate. Moreover, the subordinate effects, or events, brought to pass, as means of this end, all uniting to contribute their share towards obtaining the one last end, are very various; and therefore, by what has been now observed, the ultimate end of all must be valued more than any one of the particular means. This seems to be the case with the works of God, as may more fully appear in the sequel.

_Fourthly_, Whatsoever any agent has in view in any thing he does, which is agreeable to him _in itself_, and not merely for the sake of something else, is regarded by that agent as his _last_ end. The same may be said of avoiding that which is in itself painful or disagreeable; for the avoiding of what is disagreeable is agreeable. This will be evident to any bearing in mind the meaning of the terms. By _last_ end being meant, that which is regarded and sought by an agent, as agreeable or desirable for its _own_ sake; a _subordinate_, that which is sought only for the sake of something else.

_Fifthly_, From hence it will follow, that, if an agent has in view _more things than_ _one_ that will be brought to pass by what he does, which he loves and delights in on their _own_ account, then he must have _more things than one_ that he regards as his _last_ ends in what he does. But if there be _but one thing_ that an agent seeks, on its _own_ account, then there can be _but one_ last end which he has in all his actions and operations.

But only here a distinction must be observed of things which may be said to be _agreeable_ to an agent, in themselves considered: (1.) What is in itself grateful to an agent, and valued on its own account, _simply_ and _absolutely_ considered; antecedent to, and _independent_ of all conditions, or any supposition of particular cases and circumstances. And, (2.) What may be said to be in itself agreeable to an agent, _hypothetically_ and consequentially; or, on supposition of such and such circumstances, or on the happening of such a particular case.

Thus, for instance, a man may originally love society. An inclination to society may be implanted in his very nature; and society may be agreeable to him _antecedent_ to all pre-supposed cases and circumstances; and this may cause him to seek a family. And the comfort of society may be originally his _last_ end, in seeking a family. But after he has a family, peace, good order, and mutual justice and friendship in his family, may be agreeable to him, and what he delights in for their _own_ sake; and therefore these things may be his _last_ end in many things he does in the government and regulation of his family. But they were not his _original_ end with respect to his family. The justice and the peace of a family was not properly his last end _before_ he had a family, that induced him to seek a family, but consequentially. And the case being put of his having a family, then these things wherein the good order and beauty of a family consist, become his last end in many things he does in such circumstances.

In like manner we must suppose that God, _before_ he created the world, had some good in view, as a consequence of the world’s existence, that was _originally_ agreeable to him in itself considered, that inclined him to bring the universe into existence, in such a manner as he created it. But _after_ the world was created, and such and such intelligent creatures actually had existence, in such and such circumstances, then a wise, just regulation of them was agreeable to God, _in itself_ considered. And God’s love of justice, and hatred of injustice, would be sufficient in such a case to induce God to deal _justly_ with his creatures, and to prevent all injustice in him towards them. But yet there is no necessity of supposing, that God’s love of doing justly to intelligent beings, and hatred of the contrary, was what _originally_ induced God to create the world, and make intelligent beings; and so to order the occasion of doing either justly or unjustly. The justice of God’s nature makes a just regulation agreeable, and the contrary disagreeable, as there is occasion; the _subject_ being supposed, and the _occasion_ given. But we must suppose something else that should incline him to _create_ the subjects, or _order_ the occasion.

So that perfection of God which we call his faithfulness, or his inclination to fulfil his promises to his creatures, could not properly be what _moved_ him to create the world; nor could such a fulfilment of his promises to his creatures be his _last_ end in giving the creatures being. But yet _after_ the world is created, _after_ intelligent creatures are made, and God has bound himself by promise to them, then that disposition, which is called his faithfulness, may move him in his providential disposals towards them; and this may be the _end_ of many of God’s works of providence, even the exercise of his faithfulness in fulfilling his promises, and may be in the _lower_ sense his _last_ end; because faithfulness and truth must be supposed to be what is in _itself_ amiable to God, and what he delights in for its _own_ sake. Thus God may have ends of particular works of _providence_, which are ultimate ends in a lower sense, which were not ultimate ends of the _creation_.

So that here we have two sorts of ultimate ends; one of which may be called, _original_ and _independent_, the other, _consequential_ and _dependent_; for it is evident, the latter sort are truly of the nature of ultimate ends; because though their being agreeable to the agent, be consequential on the existence, yet the subject and occasion being supposed, they are agreeable and amiable in themselves. We may suppose, that, to a righteous Being, doing justice between two parties, with whom he is concerned, is agreeable in _itself_, and not merely for the sake of some _other_ end: And yet we may suppose, that a desire of doing justice between two parties, may be _consequential_ on the being of those parties, and the occasion given.—It may be observed, that when I speak of God’s ultimate end in the creation of the world, in the following discourse, I commonly mean in that highest sense, _viz._ the _original_ ultimate end.

_Sixthly_, It may be further observed, that the _original_ ultimate end or ends of the creation of the world is _alone_ that which induces God to give the occasion for consequential ends, by the first creation of the world, and the original disposal of it. And the more original the end is, the more extensive and universal it is. That which God had _primarily_ in view in creating, and the _original_ ordination of the world, must be constantly kept in view, and have a governing influence in all God’s works, or with respect to every thing he does towards his creatures. And therefore,

_Seventhly_, If we use the phrase ultimate end in this highest sense, then the same that is God’s ultimate end in creating the world, if we suppose but one such end, must be what be makes his ultimate aim in all his works, in every thing he does either in creation or providence. But we must suppose, that, in the _use_ to which God puts his creatures, he must evermore have a regard to the _end_ for which he has made them. But if we take _ultimate end_ in the other _lower_ sense, God may sometimes have regard to those things as ultimate ends, in particular works of providence, which could not in any proper sense be his _last_ end in creating the world.

_Eighthly_, On the other hand, whatever appears to be God’s ultimate end, in any sense, of his works of providence in _general_; that must be the ultimate end of the work of _creation_ itself. For though God may act for an end that is ultimate in a lower sense, in _some_ of his works of providence, which is not the ultimate end of the creation of the world, yet this doth not take place with regard to the works of providence _in general_; for God’s works of providence in general, are the _same_ with the _general use_ to which he puts the world he has made. And we may well argue from what we see of the general _use_ which God makes of the world, to the general _end_ for which he designed the world. Though there may be some ends of particular works of providence, that were not the _last_ end of the creation, which are in themselves grateful to God in such particular emergent circumstances, and so are last ends in an inferior sense; yet this is only in certain cases, or particular occasions. But if they are last ends of God’s proceedings in the use of the world in _general_, this shows that his making them last ends does not depend on particular cases and circumstances, but the nature of things in general, and his general design in the being and constitution of the universe.

_Ninthly_, If there be but _one thing_ that is originally, and independent on any future supposed cases, agreeable to God, to be obtained by the creation of the world, then there can be _but one last end_ of God’s work, in this highest sense. But if there are _various_ things, properly diverse one from another, that are absolutely, and independently agreeable to the Divine Being, which are actually obtained by the creation of the world, then there were _several_ ultimate ends of the creation in that highest sense.
