---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: PART I. General Misrepresentations by Mr. Williams
author: "[[Jonathan Edwards]]"
parent: "[[The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Volume One]]"
publisher: "[[CCEL]]"
year: 2002
tags:
  - resources/CCEL
related:
  - "[[Revelación general]]"
---

# PART I. General Misrepresentations by Mr. Williams

#### PART I.

the general misrepresentations mr. williams makes concerning the book he writes against.

##### SECT. 1.

_Concerning the design of my writing and publishing my book, and the question debated in it. _

Mr. Williams asserts it to be my professed and declared _design,_ in writing the book which he has undertaken to answer, to oppose Mr. Stoddard. He has taken a great liberty in this matter. He charges me with a declared design of writing in opposition to Mr. Stoddard, no less than nine or ten times in his book. And he does not content himself merely with saying, there are passages in my Preface, or elsewhere, whence this may be _inferred_; but he says expressly, that I profess to be disputing against Mr. Stoddard’s doctrine, (p. 14. _d_.) That I tell my readers, I am disputing against Mr. Stoddard’s question, (p. 37. _d_.) That I tell them so in my Preface, (p. 107. _d_.) That I often declare that I am opposing Mr. Stoddard’s opinion, (p. 132. _d_.) And on this foundation he charges me with blotting a great deal of paper, disserving the cause of truth by changing the question, and putting it in such terms as Mr. S. expressly disclaims, and then confuting it as Mr. S—d’s principle; unfair treatment of Mr. S. (p. 2. _d. e_.)—surprisingly going off from Mr. S—d’s argument to cast an odium upon it, treating Mr. S. and his doctrine in such a manner as to reproach him and his principles, tending to render them odious to the unthinking multitude, and telling a manifest untruth, (p. 14. _d_. and 15. _c. d_.) Whereas, I never once signified it to be the thing I aimed at, to oppose Mr. Stoddard, or appear as _his_ antagonist. But the very reverse was true; and meddling with him, or what he had said, I studied to avoid, as much as the circumstances of the debate with my people would allow, who had been taught by him, and who so greatly and continually alleged against me the things which he had said. Nor is there any appearance in those passages Mr. W. cites from my preface, that this was the thing I aimed at. Nay, one of those passages which he produces to prove it, shows the contrary: as it shows, that what I wrote being not consistent with, but opposite to, what Mr. S. had maintained, was an unsought for and unpleasing circumstance of that publication. My words are, “It is far from a pleasing circumstance of this publication, that it is against what my honoured grandfather strenuously maintained, both from the pulpit and the press.” Certainly my _regretting_ and _excusing_ such an unavoidable circumstance was a thing exceeding diverse from giving notice to the world, that the thing I aimed at was to set myself up as Mr. Stoddard’s antagonist, and to write an answer to, and confute, what he had written. It will, at first sight, be manifest to every impartial reader, that the design of my _Preface_ was not to state the subject and intention of the book. This is done professedly, and very particularly afterwards, in the first part of the essay itself. And if I might have common justice, surely I might be allowed to tell my own opinion, and declare my own design, without being so confidently and frequently charged with _misrepresenting_ my own thoughts and intentions.

_The very_ nature of the case_ is such as must lead every impartial person to a conviction, that the design of my writing must be to defend myself, in that controversy which I had with my people at _Northampton;_ as it is notorious and publicly known, that _that controversy_ was the occasion of my writing_;_ and that therefore my business must be to defend that opinion or position of _mine_ which I had declared to them, which had been the occasion of the controversy, and so the grand subject of debate between us_;_ whether this were exactly agreeable to any words that might be found in Mr. Stoddard’s writings on the subject, or not. Now this opinion or position was the same with that which I expressed in the first part of my book. In such terms I expressed myself to the committee of the church, when I first made that declaration of my opinion, which was the beginning of the controversy, and when writing in defence of my opinion was first proposed. And this was the point continually talked of in all conversation at _Northampton_, for more than two years, even till Mr. W.‘s book came out. The controversy was, _Whether there was any need of making a credible profession of godliness, in order to persons being admitted to full communion; whether they must profess having faith, or whether a profession of common faith were not sufficient; whether persons must be esteemed truly godly, and must be taken in under that notion, or whether if they appeared morally sincere, that were not sufficient?_ And when my book came abroad, there was no objection made, that I had not truly expressed the subject of debate in stating the question_:_ but the subject of debate afterwards, in parish meetings, church-meetings, and in all conversation, was the question laid down in my book. No suggestion existed among them, that the profession persons made in Mr. Stoddard’s way, was taken as a profession of _real_ godliness, or gospel-holiness_;_ or that they were taken in _under a notion of their being truly pious persons_, as Mr. W. would have it. There was no suggestion, that the dispute was only about the _degree of evidence;_ but what was the thing to be made _evident;_ whether_ real godliness_, or _moral sincerity?_ It was constantly insisted on, with the greatest vehemence, that it was not saving religion, which needed to be _professed_, or _pretended to;_ but another thing, religion of a lower kind. The public _acts_ of the church and parish, from time to time, show, that the point in controversy was, _Whether the professors of godliness, only, ought to be admitte_d_?_ Public votes of which I made a record, were several times passed to know the church’s mind concerning the admission of _those who are able, and willing to make a profession of godliness;_ using these terms. And once it was passed, That_ such should not be admitted in the way of publicly making such a profession_. And at another time the vote passed, _That the admission of such persons in such a way_ (described in the same words) _should not he referred to the judgment of certain neighbouring ministers_. At another time, it was insisted on by the parish, in a parish-meeting, That I should put a vote in the church, in these words, _Whether there be nut a dispute between _Mr_. _Edwards_ pastor of the church, and the church, respecting the question he hath argued in his book last published._ And accordingly the vote was put and affirmed, in a church-meeting, in the same terms. And this was the question I insisted on in my public lectures at _Northampton_, appointed for giving the reasons of my opinion. My doctrine was in these words, _It is the mind and will of God, that none should be admitted to fall communion in the church of Christ, but such as in profession, and in the eye of a reasonable judgment, are truly saints, or godly persons._ The town was full of objections against those sermons_;_ but none, as ever I heard, objected, that my doctrine was _beside the controversy_.—And this was all along the point of difference between me and the neighbouring _ministers_. This was the grand subject of debate with them, at a meeting of ministers, appointed on purpose for conference on the subject. It was wholly concerning the matter of profession, or the _thing_ to be exhibited and made evident or visible_;_ and not about the _manner_ of professing, and the _degree_ of evidence. And this was the doctrine directly opposed by Mr. A—y, one of the neighbouring ministers, whom my people had got as their champion to defend their cause in the pulpit at _Northampton_. Thus one of the corollaries he drew from his doctrine (as it was taken from his mouth in writing) was, That _“_a man may be a visible saint, and yet there be no sufficient grounds for our charity, that he is regenerate._“_ Quite contrary to what Mr. W. maintains. Another of his corollaries was in these words, _“_ A minister or church may judge a man a saint, and upon good grounds, and not have grounds to judge him regenerate._“_ He proposed this inquiry, _“_Do not such as join themselves to the church, covenant not only to be visible saints, but saints in heart_?”_ The answer was in the _negative;_ quite contrary to Mr. W. Another was_, “Does not a visible saint imply a visibility of grace, or an appearance of it?”_ The answer was, _“_Not always._“_—Quite contrary to Mr. W. Another was, _“_Is not hypocrisy in any man, to make a profession of religion, and join himself to the church, and not have grace _?”_ The answer was in the negative_;_ also quite contrary to Mr. W.—But these sermons of Mr. A—y were highly approved by the generality of the people of _Northampton_, as agreeable to their minds._

And the controversy, as I have stated it in my book, was that in which the church and I appeared before the _council_, who determined our separation, when we each of us declared our sentiments before them. The point of difference was entirely the _matter_ of profession, and the _thing_ to be made _visible_: not the _degree_ of evidence or _visibility_. No hint was given as though we both agreed, that true piety or gospel-holiness was the thing to be made visible, and that such only should be received as are truly godly persons in the eye of the church’s judgment, (as Mr. W. holds,) and that we only differed about the proper grounds of such a judgment.

And therefore it is apparent, this controversy and its consequences, were the ground of my separation from my people; and not any thing like the controversy which Mr. W. professes to manage in his answer. This controversy, when it came out in Mr. W—‘s book, was new in _Northampton_, and entirely alien from all the dispute which had filled that part of the country, and a great part of _New England_, with noise and uproar, for about two years and a half. The thing which Mr. W. over and over allows to be true, was the very same, both in effect and in terms, which the people had been most vehemently fighting against, from week to week, and from month to month, during all this time. And therefore the design of my writing led and obliged me to maintain that position or doctrine of mine, which was the occasion of this debate.

And be it so, that I did suppose this position was contrary to Mr. Stoddard’s opinion, and was opposed by him, Whether I was mistaken in this, will appear in the sequel. and therefore thought fit in my _Preface_ to excuse myself to the world for differing from him; did this oblige me, in all that I wrote for maintaining my position, to keep myself strictly to the words which he had expressed _his question_ in, and to regulate and limit myself in every argument I used, and objection I answered, by the terms which he made use of in proposing his opinion and arguments? And if I have not done it, do I therefore deserve to be charged before the world with _changing the question_, with _unfair treatment of Mr. Stoddard_, with _surprisingly going off from his argument_, with _disserving the cause of truth_, &c.

It would have been no great condescension in Mr. W. if he had allowed that _I_ knew what the question was, which was disputed between me and my people, as well as _he_, in a distant part of the country. Yea, if he had acknowledged, that I was as likely as he, to understand Mr. Stoddard’s real sentiments and practice; since I was in the ministry two years with him, as co-pastor of the same church, and was united with him in ecclesiastical administrations, in admitting members, and in examining them as to their qualifications. I have stood for more than twenty-three years in a pastoral relation to his church, most intimately acquainted with the nature of its constitution, its sentiments and method of administration, and all its religious concerns. I have myself been immediately concerned in the admission of more than three quarters of its present members, and have had the greatest occasion to look into their way of admission, and have been acquainted with every living member that Mr. S. had admitted before my coming; and have been particularly informed, by many of them, of the manner of Mr. S—d’s conduct in admitting them, their own apprehensions concerning the terms of their admission, and the profession they made in order to it; and also the sentiments of the whole of that large town, who were born and brought up under his ministry, concerning his constant doctrine and practice, relating to the admission of members, from their infancy.—Whereas, Mr. W. from his youth had lived in another part of the country, at seventy miles distance.

##### SECT. II.

_Mr. Williams’s misrepresentations of the principles and tenets, delivered in the book which he undertakes to answer. _

Mr. W. very greatly misrepresents my opinion, and the principles I maintain in my book, in many respects.

I. He says, (p. 5. _d._) “The whole argument, and indeed the whole controversy, turns upon this single point, _viz. _What is that _evidence, _which by divine appointment the church is to have, of the _saintship _of those who are admitted to the outward privileges of the covenant of grace? Mr. _Edwards _seems to suppose, this must be the _highest _evidence a man can give of sincerity; and I apprehend it to be the _lowest _evidence the nature of the thing will admit.”—But this is very strange, since I had particularly declared in my _stating of the question, _(p. 5.) that the evidence I insisted on, was _some outward manifestation, that ordinarily rendered the thing probable. _Which shows, that all I insisted on, was only, that the evidence should amount to _probability. _And if the nature of the case will admit of some _lower _kind of evidence than this, or if there be any such thing as a sort of evidence that does not so much as amount to _probability, _then it is possible that I may have some controversy with him and others about the degree of evidence. Otherwise it is hard to conceive, how he should contrive to make out a controversy with me.

But that the reader may better judge, whether Mr. W. truly represents me as supposing that the evidence which should be insisted on, is _the highest evidence a man can give of sincerity, _I would here insert an extract of a _Letter _which I wrote to the If Rev. Mr. _Peter Clark _of_ Salem-Village, _a twelvemonth before Mr. W—‘s book was published. The original is doubtless in Mr. _Clark’s _hands. In that letter, I declare my sentiments in the following words:

“It does not belong to the controversy between me and my people, how particular or large the profession should be that is required. I should not choose to be confined to exact limits as to that matter. But rather than contend, I should content myself with a few words, briefly expressing the cardinal virtues, or acts implied in a hearty compliance with the covenant of grace; the profession being made (as should appear by inquiry into the person’s doctrinal knowledge) understandingly; if there were an external conversation agreeable thereto. Yea, I should think that such a person, solemnly making such a profession, had a right to be received as the object of a public charity, however he himself might scruple his own conversion, on account of his not remembering the time, not knowing the method, of his conversion, or finding so much remaining sin, &c. And (if his own scruples did not hinder I added this, because I supposed that such persons as judge themselves unconverted, if of my principles respecting qualifications for communion, would scruple coming, and could not come with a good conscience: but if they were of Mr. S—d’s principles, viz. That unconverted men might lawfully come, neither a man’s being of that opinion, nor his judging himself unconverted, would hinder my receiving him who exhibited proper evidence to the church of his being a convert. ) I should think a minister or church had no right to debar such a professor, though he should say, he did not think himself converted. For I call that a profession of godliness, which is a profession of the great things wherein godliness consists, and not a profession of his own opinion of his good estate.”(

_Northampton, May 7, _1750.

In like manner, I explained my opinion, very particularly and expressly, before the _council _that determined my separation from my people, and before the church, in a very public manner in the meeting-house, many people being present, near a year before Mr. W—‘s book was published. And to make it the more sure, that what I maintained might be well observed, I afterwards sent in the foregoing extract of my letter to Mr. _Clark of Salem—Village, _into the council. And, as I was informed, it was particularly taken notice of in the council, and handed round among them, to be read by them.

The same _council, _having heard that I had made certain draughts of the _covenant, _or forms of a public _profession _of religion, which I stood ready to accept of from the candidates for communion, they, for their further information, sent for them. Accordingly I sent them four distinct draughts or forms, which I had drawn up about a twelvemonth before, (near two years before the publishing of Mr. W—‘s book,) as what I stood ready to accept of (any one of them) rather than contend and break with my people.—The two shortest of those forms were as follows.

_One of them _was;

“I hope, I do truly find a heart to give up myself wholly to God, according to the tenor of that covenant of grace which was sealed in my baptism, and to walk in a way of that obedience to all the commandments of God, which the covenant of grace requires, as long as I live.”

_The other,_

“I hope, I truly find in my heart a willingness to comply with all the commandments of God, which require me to give up myself wholly to him, and to serve him with my body and my spirit; and do accordingly now promise to walk in a way of obedience to all the commandments of God, as long as I live.”

Now the reader is left to judge, whether I insist, as Mr. W. represents, that persons must not be admitted without the _highest _evidence a man _can _give of sincerity.

II. Mr. W. is abundant in suggesting and insinuating to his readers, that the opinion laid down in my book is, That persons ought not to be admitted to a communion without an absolute and peremptory determination in those who admit them, that they are truly godly; because I suppose it to be necessary, that there should be a_ positive _judgment in their favour.

Here I desire the reader to observe, that the word _positive _is used in two senses. (1.) Sometimes it is put in opposition to _doubtful _or _uncertain_: and then it signifies the same as _certain, peremptory, _or _assured. _But, (2.) The word _positive _is very often used in a very different sense; not in opposition t_o doubtful, _but in opposition to _negative_: and so understood, it signifies very much the same as _real_ or _actual_. Thus, we often speak of a_ negative good, _and a positive good. A _negative good _is a mere negation or absence of _evil_;_ b_ut a _positive good _is something more,—some _real, actual good, _instead of evil. So there is a _negative charity, _and a _positive charity. _A _negative _charity is a mere absence of an ill judgment of a man, or forbearing to condemn him. Such a charity a man may have towards any stranger he transiently sees in the street, that he never saw or heard any thing of before. A _positive charity _is something further than merely not condemning, or not judging ill, it implies a _good thought _of a man. The reader will easily see that the word _positive, _taken in this sense, is an exceeding different thing from _certain _or _peremptory. _A man may have something more than a mere _negative _charity towards another, or a mere forbearing to condemn him, he may actually entertain some _good thought _of him, and yet there may be no proper _peremptoriness, _no pretence of any _certainty _in the case.

Now it is in this sense I use the phrase _positive judgment, viz. _In opposition to a mere _negative charity_; as I very plainly express the matter, and particularly and fully explain myself in _stating the question. _In my inquiry (p. 5.) I have the following words: “By _christian judgment, _I intend something further than a kind of mere _negative _charity, implying that we forbear to censure and condemn a man, because we do not know but that he may be godly, and therefore forbear to proceed on the foot of such a censure or judgment in our treatment of him; as we would kindly entertain a stranger, not knowing but, in so doing, we entertain an angel, or precious saint of God: but I mean a _positive judgment, _founded on some _positive _appearance or visibility, some outward manifestation that ordinarily renders the thing probable. There is a difference between suspending our judgment, or forbearing to condemn, or having some hope that possibly the thing may be so, and so hoping the best, and a _positive _judgment in favour of a person. For having some hope, only implies, that a man is not in utter despair of a thing; though his prevailing opinion may be otherwise, or he may suspend his opinion.

Here, I think, my meaning is very plainly and carefully explained. However, inasmuch as the word _positive _is sometimes used for _peremptory or certain, _Mr. W. catches at the term, and lays fast hold of the advantage he thinks this gives him, and is abundant, all over his book, in representing as though I insisted on a _positive judgment _in this sense. So he applies the word, referring to my use of it, from time to time. Thus, (p. 69. _b_.) “If there be any thing in this argument, I think it must be what I have observed, _viz._ That a Christian must make a _positive judgment _and determination, that another man is a saint, and this judgment must have for its ground something which he supposes is, at least ordinarily, a _certain _evidence of his saintship, and by which gracious sincerity is _certainly _distinguished from every thing else.” And, (p. 141. _a._) “The notion of men’s being able and fit to determine _positively _the condition of other men, or the _certainty _of their gracious state, has a direct tendency to deceive the souls of men.” And thus Mr. W. makes mention of a _positive judgment _above forty times in his book, with reference to my use of it, and to my declared opinion of its necessity; and every where plainly uses the phrase in _that _sense, for _absolute _and _peremptory, _in opposition to _doubtfulness_; continually insinuating, that this is what I professedly insist on. Whereas every _act _of the judgment whatsoever, is a _positive _judgment in the sense in which I have fully declared I use it, _viz. _in opposition to _negative_; which is no act, but a mere withholding of the act of the judgment, or forbearing any actual judgment. Mr. John Glass. in his Observes upon the original Constitution of the Christian Church, (p. 55, 5b.) says as follows. “You seem to have a great prejudice of what you call positive evidences, and judging upon them in the admission of church-members. And I am at some loss to understand what you mean by them, though I have heard the expression frequently, among people of your opinion, used to express some very ill thing. If you mean by positive evidences, infallible evidences of a thing that none but God infallibly knows, and can assure a man’s own conscience of, with respect to a man himself: I think it would be a very great evil for a man to require such evidence to found his judgment of charity, concerning another man’s faith and holiness, or concerning his being an object of brotherly love. And I think, he is bound by the law of Christ to form his judgment in this matter upon less evidence. But if you mean positive evidence in opposition to negative, which is no evidence, I must own, I know not how to form a judgment of charity without some positive evidence. And is not a credible profession something positive?—Is not a credible profession of the faith, love, and hope that is in Christ, or of Christianity, a positive evidence of a man’s being an object of brotherly love, which evidence ought to be the ground of my judgment of charity concerning him, that he is a Christian, a believer in Christ, a brother for whom Christ died? If it be otherwise, and if there be no evidence upon which I can charitably judge, that a man is a brother for whom Christ died? If it be otherwise, and if there be no evidence upon which I can charitably judge, that a man is a brother for whom Christ died. Then tell me, how I can evidence my love to Jesus Christ, in the labour of love towards my brother, whom I have seen; and my love to God, in my love to them that are begotten of him.” Mr. W. himself does abundantly suppose, that there must be a _positive _judgment in _this _sense. He grants the very thing, though he rejects the term. For he holds, there must be such a visibility as makes persons to appear to be real saints, (p. 5. _b_.)—He allows, that the moral image of God or Christ must appear, or be supposed to be in them, as the ground and reason of our charity; and that there must be some apprehension, some judgment of mind, of the saintship of persons, for its foundation, (p. 68. _c. d. e. _and 69. _a. _71. _d._)_—_That they must have such a character appearing in them. (p. 55. _e._)—That there must be a judgment founded on moral evidence of gospel-holiness, (p. 139. _d._)

III. Mr. W. to make my scheme appear the more ridiculous, more than once represents it as my opinion, that in order to persons being admitted into the church, there must be a judgment of their being regenerate, founded on such a degree of evidence, as that it shall not be liable to be mistaken more than _once in ten times_. Thus, (p. 63. _c._) “Mr. _Edwards _himself supposes, in his own scheme, when he has made a positive judgment that every one singly whom he admits into the church is regenerate; yet when taken collectively, it is probable _one in_ _ten _will be an hypocrite.” (So, p. 71. _b_.) “If any thing be intended to the purpose for which this argument is brought, I conceive, it must mean, that there must be such a _positive judgment _of the real holiness of persons, as is not mistaken more than once in ten times.”—Now, I desire the reader to observe what is the whole ground, on which he makes such a representation. In explaining my opinion, in the beginning of my _Inquiry, _(p. 6.) I desired it might be observed, that I did not suppose we ought to expect any such degree of _certainty _of the godliness of those who are admitted into the church, as that when the whole number admitted are taken collectively, or considered in the gross, we should have any reason to suppose every one to be truly godly; though we might have charity for each one that was admitted, taken _singly, _and by himself. And to show, that such a thing was possible, I endeavoured to illustrate it by a comparison, or supposed case _of probability of ten to one, _in the example of certain stones, with such probable marks of a _diamond, _as by experience had been found not to fail more than _once in ten times. _In which case, if a particular stone were found with those marks, there would be a probability of _ten to one, _with respect to that stone, singly taken, that it was genuine: but if ten such were taken together, there would not be the same probability that every one of them was so; but in this case, it is as likely as not, that some one in the ten is spurious. Now it is so apparent, that this particular degree of probability of _ten to one _is mentioned only as a _supposed case, _for illustration, and because, in a particular example, some number or other must be mentioned, that it would have been an affront to the sense of my readers to have added any caution, that he should not understand me otherwise. However, Mr. W. has laid hold of this, as a good handle by which he might exhibit my scheme to the world in a ridiculous light; as though I had declared it my real opinion, that there must be the probability of just _ten to one, _of true godliness, in order to persons’ admission into the church. He might with as much appearance of sense and justice, have asserted concerning all the supposed cases in books of arithmetic, that the authors intend these cases should be understood as real _facts, _and that they have written their books, with all the sums and numbers in them, as books of _history_; and if any cases mentioned there only as examples of the several rules, are unlikely to be true accounts of fact, therefore have charged the authors with writing a _false _and _absurd _history.

IV. Another thing, yet further from what is honourable in Mr. W. is this; That, whereas I said as above, that there ought to be a prevailing opinion concerning those that are admitted, _taken singly, or by themselves, _that they are truly godly or gracious, though when we look on the whole number in the gross, we are far from determining that every one is a true saint, and that not one of the judgments we have passed, has been mistaken; Mr. W. because I used the phrase _singly taken, _has laid hold on the expression, and from thence has taken occasion to insinuate to his readers, as if my scheme were so very extravagant, that according to this, when a great multitude are admitted, their admitters must be confident of every one’s being _regenerated. _Hence he observes, (p. 98. _c_.) “There is no appearance, that _John _made a positive judgment that _every one _of these people were regenerated. Plainly using the expression as a very strong one; leading the reader to suppose, that I insist the evidence shall be so clear, that when such a vast multitude as _John _baptized are viewed, the admitter should be peremptory in it, that his judgment has not failed so much as in a _single _instance; the very _reverse _of what I had expressed. In like manner, Mr. W. treats the matter from time to time. As in p. 55. _a. _“The thing to be proved from hence is, that the apostles and primitive Christians, not only thought that these persons were Christians, by reason of their external calling, and professed compliance with the call; but had formed a positive judgment concerning every one of them singly, that they were real saints.” Here the expression is plainly used as a very strong one; as implying much more than esteeming so great a multitude, when taken in the gross, to be generally true saints, and with a manifest design to carry the same idea in the mind of the reader as was before mentioned. See another like instance, p. 62. _c._

V. However, my opinion is not represented bad enough yet; but to make it appear still worse, Mr. W. is bold to strain his representation of it to that height, as to suggest that what I insist on, is a _certainty _of others’ regeneration; though this be so diverse from what I had largely explained in stating the question, and plainly expressed in other parts of my book, In stating the question, p. 5. b. I explained the requisite visibility, to be some outward manifestation, that ordinarily renders the thing probable. To the like purpose, is what I lay in p 10. c. and p. 11 a. b c. and p 12. a. b. c. And in p 106. c. I say expressly, “Not a certainty, but a profession and visibility of these things, must be the rule of the church’s proceeding. and also inconsistent with his own representations in other places. For if what I insist on be a probability that _may fail once in ten times, _as he says it is, p. 63. _a. _then it is not a _certainty _that I insist on; as he suggests, p. 141. _a._—Speaking of the evil consequences of my opinion, he says, “The notion of men’s being able and fit to determine positively the condition of other men, or the certainty of their gracious estate, has a direct tendency to deceive the souls of men.” So again in p 69. And he suggests, that I require more than _moral evidence, _in p. 6. _c_. and p. 139. _d._

VI. Mr. W. represents me as insisting on some way of judging the state of such as are admitted to communion, _by their inward and spiritual experiences, _diverse from judging _by their profession and behaviour. _So, p. 7. _b. _“If _their outward profession and behaviour _be the ground of this judgment, then it is not _the inward experience of the heart._“ P. 55. _b_. “Which judgment must be founded on something beyond and beside their external calling, and _visible profession _to comply with it, and to be separated for God: and therefore this judgment must be founded, either upon revelation, or a personal acquaintance with _their experiences,_“ &c. In like manner he is abundant, from one end of his book to the other, in representing as though I insisted on judging men _by their inward and spiritual experiences, _in some peculiar manner. Which is something surprising, since there is not so much as a word said about _relating, or giving an account of, experiences, _or what is commonly so called, as a term of communion. Mr. W. (p 6._a._) pretends to quote two passages of mine, as an evidence, that this is what I insist on. One is from the 5th page of my book. It is true, I there say thus, “It is a visibility to the eye of the public charity, and not a private judgment, that gives a person a right to be received as a visible saint by the public.” And I there say, “A public and serious profession of the great and main things wherein the essence of true religion or godliness consists, together with an honest character, an agreeable conversation, and good understanding of the doctrines of Christianity, and particularly those doctrines that teach the grand condition of salvation, and the nature of true saving religion; this justly recommends persons to the good opinion of the public; whatever suspicions and fears any particular person, either the minister, or some other, may entertain, from what he in particular has observed; perhaps the manner of his expressing himself _in giving an account of his experiences, _or an obscurity in the order and method of his _experiences,_“ &c.—But the words do not imply, it may be demanded of the candidate, that he should give an account of his experiences to the minister, or any body else, as the term of his admission into the church: nor had I respect to any such thing. But I knew it was the manner in many places for those who hoped they were godly persons, to converse with their neighbours, and especially with their minister, about their experiences; whether it was required of them in order to their coming into the church, or no; and particularly, I was sensible, that this was the manner at _Northampton, _for whose sake especially I wrote; and I supposed it the way of many ministers, and people, to judge of others’ state, openly and publicly, by the order and method of their experiences, or the manner of their relating them. But this I condemn in the very passage that Mr. W. quotes; and very much condemn in other writings of mine which have been published; and have ever loudly condemned, and borne my testimony against.

There is one passage more, which Mr. W. adds to the preceding, and fathers on me, to prove that I require _an account of experiences _in order to admission; pretending to rehearse my words, with marks of quotation, saying as follows, (p. 6. _a._) and as he further explains himself elsewhere; “The proper visibility which the public is to have of a man’s being a saint, must be on some account of his experience of those doctrines which teach the nature of true saving religion.”—I have made long and diligent search for such a passage in my writings, but cannot find it. Mr. W. says, _I thus explain myself elsewhere_; but I wish he had mentioned in what place.

If there be such a sentence in some of my writings, (as I suppose there is not,) it will serve little to Mr. W—‘s purpose. If we take the word _experience_ according to the common acceptation of it in the English language, _viz_. a person’s perceiving or knowing any thing by trial or experiment, or by immediate sensation or consciousness within himself; in this sense, I own, it may from what I say in my book be inferred, that a man’s profession of his experience should be required as a term of communion. And so it may be as justly and as plainly inferred, that Mr. W. himself insists on a profession of experience as a term of communion; experience of a deep conviction of a man’s undone state without Christ; experience of a persuasion of his judgment and conscience, that there is no other way of salvation; experience of unfeigned desires to be brought to the terms of the covenant. For such things as these, he says, must be professed. So, p. 75. d. e. and in innumerable other places. There is no such thing possible as a man’s professing any thing within himself or belonging to his own mind, either good or bad, either common or saving, unless it be something that he _finds_, or (which is the same thing) _experiences_, within himself.

I know the word _experience_ is used by many in a sort of peculiar sense, for the particular order and method of what passes within the mind and heart in conversion. And in this sense, Mr. W. knows, I disclaim the notion of making _experiences_ a term of communion. I say, he knows it, because (in p. 6. a.) he quotes and rehearses the very words wherein I do expressly disclaim it. And I am very large and particular in testifying against it in my book on _Religious Affections_: (a book I have good reason to think Mr. W. has seen and read, having been thus informed by a man of his own principles, that had it from his mouth.) There, in p. 300. e. and 301.a. I say as follows: “In order to persons making a proper profession of Christianity, such as the Scripture directs to, and such as the followers of Christ should require in order to the acceptance of the professors with full charity, as of their society, it is not necessary they should give an account of the particular _steps_ and _method_, by which the Holy Spirit, sensibly to them, wrought, and brought about those great essential things of Christianity in their hearts. There is no footstep in the Scripture of any such way of the apostles, or primitive ministers and Christians, requiring any such relation in order to their receiving and treating others as their christian brethren, to all intents and purposes; or of their first examining them concerning the particular method and order of their _experiences_.—They required of them a profession of the things wrought; but no account of the manner of working was required of them. Nor is there the least shadow in the Scripture of any such custom in the church of God, from _Adam _to the death of the apostle _John._“ To the same purpose again I express myself in p. 302 ._d. _And in the _Preface, _to the book that Mr. W. writes against, I make particular mention of this book _on Religious Affections, _wherein these things are said; and there declare expressly, that when I wrote that book, I was of the same mind concerning the qualifications of communicants that I am of now.—But,

VII. To make my scheme still more obnoxious and odious, Mr. W. once and again insinuates, that I insist on an account of such inward feelings, as are by men supposed to be the certain discriminating marks of grace, (so p. 7._b_. and 141._e_.) though I never once used the phrase any where in my book.—I said not a word about _inward feelings_, from one end of it to the other. Nor is any _inward feeling _at all more implied in my scheme, than in his. But however Mr. W. knew that these phrases, _experiences_, and _inward feelings_, were become odious of late to a great part of the country; and especially the latter of them, since _Mr. Whitfield_ used it so much. And he well knew, that to tack these phrases to my scheme, and to suggest to his readers that these were the things I professed to insist on, would tend to render me and my scheme contemptible. If he says, Though I use not that phrase, yet the things I insist on, are such as are _inwardly felt_; such as saving repentance, faith, &c. I answer, these things are no more _inward feelings_, than the things he himself insists on; such as a _deep conviction_ of a man’s undone state, _unfeigned fervent desires_ after Christ, a _fixed resolution_ for Christ, _engagedness_ for heaven, &c.

VIII. Mr. W. abundantly, in almost all parts of his book, represents my principles to be such as suppose men to be the SEARCHERS _of others’ hearts_. For which I have given no other ground, than only supposing that some such qualifications are necessary in order to communion, which have their seat _in the heart_, and so not to be intuitively seen by others; and that such qualifications must, by profession and practice, be made so visible or credible to others, that others may rationally judge they are there. And Mr. W. supposes the same thing as much as I. In p. 111. _c_. he expressly speaks of the qualifications necessary to communion, as being _in the heart_, and not possible to be known any other way than by their being _seen_ there; and also often allows, that these qualifications must be exhibited, and made _visible_, by a credible profession, and answerable practice. Yea, he goes further, he even supposes that those who admit them to sacraments, ought to be _satisfied_ by their profession, that they _really have these qualifications_. Thus he says, p. 54. c. “The baptizer _ought to be satisfied_ by a person’s profession, that he _really believes the gospel_, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Saviour.”

IX. Mr. W. is not contented with all these representations of my scheme, but will have it appear more absurd and monstrous still; and therefore represents me as maintaining that it is not the _visible profession of experiences_, that I suppose the ground of the church’s judgment; but these _experiences and inward feelings_ themselves, by having _the heart turned inside out_, and viewing them immediately _in the heart itself, _and_ judging upon the next and immediate actings of the heart.—_Here, I only desire the reader to read down Mr. W. ‘s 7th page, and make his own reflections.

X. Whereas, in p. 16. of my book, I observed it to be the opinion of some, that “Although the members of the visible church are saints in profession and visibility, and in the acceptance of others, yet this is not with reference to saving holiness, but quite another sort of saintship, _viz. moral sincerity_; and that this is the _real saintship, discipleship, _and _godliness, _that is professed and visible in them,” &c. Mr. W. (p. 4, 5.) says, He does not remember that he ever heard of this, or that anybody thought of it, before he saw it in my book; and represents it as a _poor man of straw, _of my own framing; and he insists upon it, that _it is allowed on all hands, _that the visibility must be _with reference to saving holiness._

I will not say, that Mr. W. knew it to be a false representation which he here makes; but this I will say, that he ought to have been better informed, before he had thus publicly ridiculed this as a fiction of _mine_; especially considering the opportunities and advantages he has had to know otherwise: this being the notion that had been (as was before observed) so loudly and publicly insisted on, for more than two years, by the people of _Northampton, _and by the neighbouring ministers, and those of them that were Mr. W.‘s near relatives; as he has abundant opportunities to be fully informed, having withal had great inducements to inquire. Besides, that this has been the universal opinion of all that part of the country (who thought themselves Mr. Stoddard’s followers) for more than twenty years, is a fact as notorious, as that the people there generally believe Mr. Stoddard’s doctrine of the necessity of a work of conversion in order to get to heaven.—And this is the opinion professedly maintained in a pamphlet published in _Boston, _(anno 1741,) entitled, _A Right to the Lord’s Supper considered_: a piece which has long been well known among Mr. W.’s nearest relatives, and in good repute with them; as I have had occasion to observe. This pamphlet insists expressly and abundantly, that _moral sincerity _is the REAL _discipleship and holiness, _with respect to which visible Christians are called _disciples _and _saints _in Scripture. Particularly see pages 9, 10, 13, and 14. And which is more strange yet, Mr. Blake, the great author Mr. W. makes so much use of, and in a book which I know he has long been the possessor of, speaks much of a profession of religion that has respect only to a dogmatical, historical faith, a common faith, a faith true indeed (as he says) in its kind, but short of that which is justifying and saving, and a profession which goes no further, as that which entitles to sealing ordinances. See Blake on the Covenant, p. 241, 244, 245. The same author again and again distinguishes between _justifying faith _and_ faith of profession_; as in p. 284, 285, 286. And which is more than all this, Mr. W. (as will appear in the sequel) abundantly contends for the same thing himself, though against himself, and although he charges me (p. 35._d_.) with a great misrepresentation, in supposing that according to the scheme of my opposers, the profession required in those that are admitted, does not imply a pretence to any thing more than moral sincerity and common grace.
