---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: PART III. Objections answered.
author: "[[Jonathan Edwards]]"
parent: "[[The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Volume One]]"
publisher: "[[CCEL]]"
year: 2002
tags:
  - resources/CCEL
---

# PART III. Objections answered.

#### PART III.

objections answered.

##### OBJECT. I.

The Scripture calls the members of the visible church by the name of _disciples, scholars, _or _learners_: and that suggests to us this notion of the visible church, that it is the _school _of Christ, into which persons are admitted in order to their _learning of Christ, _and coming to spiritual attainments, in the use of the means of teaching, discipline, and training up, established in the school. Now if this be a right notion of the visible church, then reason shows that no other qualifications are necessary in order to being members of this _school_, than such a _faith _and _disposition of mind _as are requisite to persons’ putting themselves under Christ as their _Master _and _Teacher, _and subjecting themselves to the _orders _of the school. But a _common faith _and _moral sincerity _are sufficient for this.—Therefore the Scripture leads us to suppose the visible church to be _properly constituted _of those who have these qualifications, though they have not _saving faith _and _true piety._

Answer 1. I own, the Scripture calls the members of the visible church by the name of _disciple_; but deny, that it _therefore _follows that the church of which they are members, is duly and properly constituted of those who have not true piety. Because, if this consequence was good, then it would equally follow, that not only the _visible, _but also the _invisible _or _mystical, _church is properly constituted of those who have not unfeigned faith and true piety. For the members of the mystical church, _as such,_ and to denote the special character of such, are called _disciples_; Luke xiv. 26, 27, 33.. and John viii. 31; xiii. 35; xv. 8.. This shows, that in the argument I am answering, there is no connexion between the premises and the conclusion. For the force of the objection consists in this, that the members of the visible church are called _disciples _in Scripture: this is the sum total of the premises: and if there be any connexion between the premises and the conclusion, it must lie in the truth of this proposition; _The church whose members are called by the name of _disciples, _as signifying their state and quality as members of that society, that church is properly and fitly constituted, not only of persons truly pious, but of others that have merely a common faith and virtue_. But this proposition, we have seen, is not true; and so there is no connexion between the former and latter part of it, which are the same with the premises and conclusion of this argument.

2. Though I do not deny, that the visible church of Christ may fitly be represented as a school of Christ, where persons are trained up in the use of means, in order to _some _spiritual attainments: yet it will not hence necessarily follow, that this is in order to _all _good attainments; for it will not follow but that certain good attainments may be _prerequisite, _in order to a _place _in the school. The church of Christ is a school appointed for the training up Christ’s _little children, _to greater degrees of knowledge, higher privileges, and greater serviceableness in this world, and more meetness for the possession of their eternal inheritance. But there is no necessity of supposing, that it is in order to fit them to become Christ’s children, or to be introduced into his family; any more than there is a necessity of supposing, because a prince puts his children under tutors, that therefore it must be in order to their being of the royal family. If it be necessary, that there should be a church of Christ appointed as a school of instruction and discipline, to bring persons to _all _good attainments whatsoever, then it will follow, that there must be a visible church constituted of _scandalous _and _profane _persons and _heretics, _and all in common that assume the christian name, that so means may be used with them in order to bring them to _moral sincerity, _and an acknowledgment of the christian faith.

3. I grant, that no other qualifications are necessary in order to being members of that school of Christ which is his visible church, than such as are requisite in order to _their subjecting themselves to Christ as their Master and Teacher, _and _subjecting themselves to the laws and orders of his school_: nevertheless I deny, that a _common faith _and _moral sincerity _are sufficient for this; because none do truly subject themselves to Christ _as their Master_, but such as having their _hearts purified by faith_, are delivered from the reigning power of _sin_: for we cannot subject ourselves to obey _two _contrary _masters _at the same time. None submit to Christ as _their Teacher, _but those who truly receive him as their Prophet, to teach them by his word and Spirit; giving up themselves to his teachings, _sitting _with _Mary _at _Jesus’ feet to hear his word_; and hearkening more to his dictates, than those of their blind and deceitful lusts, and relying on his wisdom more than their own. The Scripture knows nothing of an ecclesiastical school constituted of _enemies of the cross of Christ, _and appointed to bring such to be reconciled to him and submit to him as their Master. Neither have they who are not truly pious persons, any true disposition of heart to submit to the _laws _and _orders _of Christ’s school, the rules which his word prescribes to all his scholars; such as, _to love their Master _supremely; _to love one another as brethren_; and _to love their book, i. e. _their Bible, more than vain trifles and amusements, yea, above gold and silver; _to be faithful to the interest of the Master and of the school_; to _depend on his teachings_; to _cry to him for knowledge_;_ above all their gettings, to get understanding, _&c.

4. Whatever ways of constituting the church may to us seem fit, proper, and reasonable, the _question _is, not what constitution of Christ’s church seems convenient to _human _wisdom, but what constitution is actually established by _Christ’s _infinite wisdom. Doubtless, if men should set their wits to work, and proceed according to what seems good in their sight, they would greatly alter Christ’s constitution of his church, to make it more convenient and beautiful, and would adorn it with a vast variety of ingenious inventions; as the church of Rome has done. The question is, whether this _school _of Christ which they talk of, made up very much of those who pretend to no experiences or attainments but what consist with their being _enemies _of Christ in their hearts, and who in reality love the vilest lust better than him, be that church of Christ which in the New Testament is denominated _his city, his temple, his family, his body, _&c. by which names the visible church of Christ is there frequently called.

I acknowledge, that _means _of Christ’s appointment, are to be used with those who are Christ’s, and do not profess themselves any other, to change their _hearts, _and bring them to be Christ’s _friends_ and _disciples. _Such means are to be used with all sorts of persons, with Jews, Mahometans, heathens, with nominal Christians that are heretical or vicious, the profane, the intemperate, the unclean, and all other enemies of Christ; and these means to be used constantly, and laboriously. Scandalous persons need to go to _school, _to learn to be Christians, as much as other men. And there are many persons that are not _morally sincere, _who from selfish and sinister views consent ordinarily to go to church, and so be in the way of means. And none ought to forbid them thus going to Christ’s _school, _that they may be taught by him, in the ministry of the gospel. But yet it will not follow, that such a _school _is the _church _of _Christ. _Human laws can put persons, even those who are very vicious, into the _school _of Christ, in that sense; they can oblige them constantly to be present at public teaching, and attend on the means of grace appointed by Christ, and dispensed in his name: but human laws cannot join men to the _church _of Christ, and make them members of his body.

##### OBJECT. II.

_Visible saintship _in the scripture sense cannot be the same with that which has been supposed and insisted on, because Israel of old were called _God’s people, _when it is certain the greater part of them were far from having any _such _visible holiness as this. Thus the _ten_ _tribes_ were called God’s people, Hos. iv. 6.. after they had revolted from the true worship of God, and had obstinately continued in their idolatrous worship at Bethel and Dan for about two hundred and fifty years, and were at that time, a little before their captivity especially, in the height of their wickedness. So the Jews are called _God’s people,_ in Ezek. xxxvi. 20.. and other places, at the time of their captivity in Babylon, a time when most of them were abandoned to all kinds of the most horrid and open impieties, as the prophets frequently represent. Now it is certain, that the people at that time were not called _God’s people_ because of any visibility of true piety to the eye of reason or of a rational charity, because most of them were grossly wicked, and declared their sin as Sodom. And in the same manner wherein the Jews of old were _God’s people,_ are the members of the visible christian Gentile church _God’s people_; for they are spoken of as _graffed into the same olive-tree,_ from whence the former were _broken off by unbelief._

Answ. 1. The argument proves too much, and therefore nothing at all. Those whom I oppose in this controversy, will in effect as much oppose themselves in it, as me. The objection, if it has any force, equally militates against their and my notion of visible saintship. For those Jews, which it is alleged were called God’s people, and yet were so notoriously, openly, and obstinately wicked, had neither any visibility of true piety, nor yet of that _moral sincerity_ in the profession and duties of the true religion, which the opponents themselves suppose to be requisite in order to a proper visible holiness, and a due admission to the privileges and ordinances of the church of God. None will pretend, that these obstinate idolaters and impious wretches had those qualifications which are now requisite in order to an admission to the _christian_ sacraments. And therefore to what purpose can they bring this objection? which, if it proves any thing, overthrows my scheme and their own both together, and both in an equally effectual manner. And not only so, but will thoroughly destroy the schemes of all _protestants _through the world, concerning the qualifications of the subjects of christian ordinances. And therefore the support of what I have laid down against those whom I oppose in this controversy, requires no further answer to this objection. Nevertheless, for greater satisfaction, I would here observe further:

2. That such appellations as God’s _people, _God’s _Israel, _and some other like phrases, are used and applied in Scripture with considerable _diversity _of intention. Thus, we have a plain distinction between the _house of Israel _and the _house of Israel, _in Ezek. xx. 38-40.. By the house of _Israel _in the 39th verse is meant literally the nation or family of _Israel_; but by the house of _Israel _in the 40th verse seems to be intended the _spiritual house, _the body of God’s visible saints, that should attend the ordinances of his public worship in gospel—times. So likewise there is a distinction made between the _house of Israel, _and _God’s disciples _who should profess and visibly adhere _to his law and testimony, _in Isa. viii. 14-17.. And though the whole nation of the Jews are often called _God’s people _in those degenerate times wherein the prophets were sent to reprove them, yet at the same time they are charged as _falsely calling themselves of the holy city,_ Isa. xlviii. 2.. And God often tells them, they are rather to be reckoned among aliens, and as children of the Ethiopians, or posterity of the ancient Canaanites, on account of their grossly wicked and scandalous behaviour. See Amos ix. 7, &c.. Ezek. xvi. 2, 3, &c. verse 45, &c.. Isa. i. 10..

It is evident that God sometimes, according to the methods of his marvellous mercy and long-suffering towards mankind, has a merciful respect to a degenerate church, become exceeding corrupt, and constituted of members who have not those qualifications which ought to be insisted on. God continues still to have respect to them so far as not utterly to forsake them, or wholly to deny his confirmation of and blessing on their administrations. And not being utterly renounced of God, their administrations are to be looked upon as in some respect valid, and the society as in some sort a people or church of God. This was the case with the church of Rome, at least till the Reformation and council of Trent; for till then we must own their baptisms and ordinations to be valid.—The church that the pope sits in, is called, _The temple of God, _2 Thess. ii. 4..

And with regard to the people of Israel, it is very manifest, that something diverse is oftentimes intended by that nation being _God’s people, _from their being visible saints, visibly holy, or having those qualifications which are requisite in order to a due admission to the ecclesiastical privileges of such. That _nation, _that _family of Israel according to the flesh, _and _with regard to that external and carnal qualification, _were in some sense adopted by God to be his _peculiar people, _and his _covenant people. _This is not only evident by what has been already observed, but also indisputably manifest from Rom. ix. 3, 4, 5. “I have great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart; for I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen, according to the flesh, who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises; whose are the fathers; and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came.” It is to be noted, that the privileges here mentioned are spoken of as belonging to the Jews, not now as visible saints, not as professors of the true religion, not as members of the visible church of Christ; but only as people of _such a nation, _such a blood, such an external and carnal relation to the patriarchs their ancestors, _Israelites _according to the flesh. For the apostle is speaking here of the _unbelieving Jews, _professed unbelievers, that were out of the christian church, and open visible enemies to it, and such as had no right to the external privileges of Christ’s people. So, in Rom. xi. 28, 29.. this apostle speaks of the same _unbelieving Jews, _as in some respect an _elect people, _and interested in the _calling, promises, _and _covenants _God formerly gave to their forefathers, and as still _beloved _for their sakes. Rom. xi. 28, 29.“As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sake; but as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers’ sakes: for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.” These things are not privileges belonging to the Jews now as a people of the right religion, or in the true church of visible worshippers of God; but as a people of such a pedigree or blood; and that even after the ceasing of the Mosaic administration. But there were privileges more especially belonging to them under the Old Testament: they were a _family _that God had chosen in distinction from all others, to show special favour to above all other _nations. _It was manifestly agreeable to God’s design to constitute things so under the Old Testament, that the means of grace and spiritual privileges and blessings should be—though not wholly, yet in a great measure—confined to a _particular family, _much more than those privileges and blessings are confined to any posterity or blood now under the gospel. God purposely by these favours distinguished _that nation _not only from those who were not professed worshippers of the true God, but also in a great measure _from other nations, _by a constituted wall of separation. This was not merely a wall between professors and non-professors, but between nation and nations. God, if he pleases, may by his sovereignty annex his blessing, and in some measure fix it, for his own reasons, to a particular blood, as well as to a particular place or spot of ground, to a certain building, to a particular heap of stones, or altar of brass, to particular garments, and other external things. And it is evident, that he actually did affix his blessing to that particular external family of Jacob, very much as he did to the city Jerusalem, where he chose to place his name, and to mount Zion _where he_ _commanded the blessing. _God did not so affix his blessing to Jerusalem or mount Zion, as to limit himself, either by confining the blessing wholly to that place, never to bestow it elsewhere; nor by obliging himself always to bestow it on those that sought him there; nor yet obliging himself never to withdraw his blessing from thence, by forsaking his dwelling-place there, and leaving it to be a common or profane place. But he was pleased to make it the seat of his blessing in a peculiar manner, in great distinction from other places. In like manner did he fix his blessing to the progeny of Jacob. It was a family which he delighted in, and which he blessed in a peculiar manner, and to which in a great measure he confined the blessing; but not so as to limit himself, or so as to oblige himself to bestow it on all of that blood, or not to bestow it on others that were not of that blood. He affixed his blessing both to the place and nation, by sovereign election, Psal. cxxxii. 13-15.. He annexed and fixed his blessing to both by covenant.

To that nation he fixed his blessing by his covenant with the patriarchs. Indeed the main thing, the substance and marrow of that covenant which God made with Abraham and the other patriarchs, was the _covenant of grace, _which is continued in these days of the gospel, and extends to all his spiritual seed, of the Gentiles as well as Jews: but yet that covenant with the patriarchs contained other things that were appendages to that everlasting covenant of grace; promises of lesser matters, subservient to the grand promise of the future seed, and typical of things appertaining to him. Such were those that annexed the blessing to the land of Canaan, and the progeny of Isaac and Jacob. Just so it was also as to the covenant God made with David. 2 Sam. vii.. and Psal. cxxxii.. If we consider that covenant with regard to its marrow and soul, it was the covenant of grace: but there were other subservient promises which were typical of its benefits; such were promises of blessings to the nation of Israel, of continuing the temporal crown to David’s posterity, and of fixing the blessing to Jerusalem or mount Zion, as the place which he chose to set his name there. And in this sense it was that the _very family _of Jacob were _God’s people by covenant, _and his _chosen people_; even when they were no visible saints, when they lived in idolatry, and made no profession of the true religion.

On the whole, it is evident that the _very nation _of Israel, not as visible saints, but _as the progeny of Jacob according to the flesh, _were in some respect a _chosen people, _a _people of God,_ a _covenant people, _an _holy nation_; even as Jerusalem was a _chosen city,_ the _city of God, _a _holy _city, and a city that God had engaged _by covenant _to dwell in.

Thus a sovereign and all-wise God was pleased to ordain things with respect to _the nation _of Israel. Perhaps we may not be able to give all the reasons of such a constitution; but some of them seem to be pretty manifest; as,

1. The great and main end of separating one particular nation from all others, as God did _the nation _of Israel, was to prepare the way for the coming of the _Messiah. _God’s covenant with Abraham and the other patriarchs implied that the Messiah should be _of their blood, _or their seed _according to the flesh. _And therefore it was requisite that _their progeny according to the flesh _should be fenced in by a wall of separation, and made _God’s people. _If the Messiah had been born of some of the _professors of Abraham’s religion, _but of some other nation, that religion being propagated from nation to nation, as it is now under the gospel, it would not have answered the covenant with Abraham, for the Messiah to have been born of Abraham’s seed only in this sense. The _Messiah _being by covenant so related to Jacob’s _progeny according to the flesh,_ God was pleased, agreeable to the nature of such a covenant, to show great respect to that people on account of that external relation. Therefore the apostle mentions it as one great privilege, that of them _according to the flesh_ Christ came, Rom. ix. 5.. As the introducing of the _Messiah_ and his salvation and kingdom was the special design of all God’s dealings and peculiar dispensations towards that people, the natural result of this was, that great account should be made of their being _of that nation, _in God’s covenant dealings with them.

2. That nation was a _typical nation_. There was then literally a _land, _which was a type of heaven, the true dwelling-place of God; and an _external city,_ which was a type of the spiritual city of God; _an external temple of God,_ which was a type of his spiritual temple. So there was an_ external people and family of God,_ by carnal generation, which was a type of his spiritual progeny. And the covenant by which they were made a people of God, was a type of the covenant of grace; and so is sometimes represented as a marriage-covenant. God, agreeably to the nature of that dispensation, showed a great regard to external and carnal things in those days, as types of spiritual things. What a great regard God did show then to external qualifications for privileges and services, appears in this, that there is ten times so much said in the books of Moses about such qualifications in the institutions of the passover and tabernacle services, as about any moral qualifications whatsoever. And so much were such typical qualifications insisted on, that even by the law of Moses, the congregation of the Lord, or church of visible worshippers of God, and the number of public professors of the true religion who were visible saints, were not the same. Some were of the latter, that were not of the former; as the eunuchs, who were excluded the congregation, though never so externally religious, yea truly pious; and so also bastards, &c.

3. It was the sovereign pleasure of God to choose the posterity of _Jacob according to the flesh,_ to reserve them for special favours to the end of time. And therefore they are still kept a distinct nation, being still reserved for distinguishing mercy in the latter day, when they shall be restored to the church of God. God is pleased in this way to testify his regard to their holy ancestors, and his regard to their external relation to Christ. Therefore the apostle still speaks of them as an _elect nation, _and _beloved for the fathers’ sakes,_ even after they were broken off from the good olive by unbelief. God’s covenant with Abraham is in some sense in force with respect to that people, and reaches them even to this day; and yet surely they are not God’s Covenant people, in the sense that visible Christians are. See Lev. xxvi. 42..

If it be said, It was often foretold by the prophets, that in gospel-days other _nations_ should be the people of God, as well as the _nation_ of the Jews: and when Christ sent forth his apostles, he bid them go and _disciple all nations_.

I answer; By a common figure of speech the prevailing part of a nation are called _the nation,_ and what is done to them is said to be done to the nation, and what is done _by_ them is said to be done _by_ that nation. And it is to be hoped, that the time is coming when the prevailing part of many nations, yea of every nation under heaven, will be regularly brought into the visible church of Christ. If by _nations_ in these prophecies we understand any other than the prevailing part, and it be insisted on that we must understand it of all the people belonging to those nations; there never yet has been any nation in this sense regularly brought into the visible church of Christ, even according to the scheme of those whom I oppose. For there never yet has been a whole nation outwardly moral. And besides, what Mr. Blake says in his _Treatise of the Covenant, _page 238. may be applied here, and serve as an answer to this objection: “The prophecies of the Old Testament (says he) of the glory of the New-Testament times, are in Old-Testament phrases, by way of allusion to the worship of those times, set forth to us.” In Rev. xxi. 24.. _nations _are spoken of, as having an interest in the _New Jerusalem, _which yet is represented as perfectly pure, without the least degree of pollution and defilement, verse 27.. And as for the command to the apostles, to _disciple all nations, _it was a direction to them as to what they should attempt, not a prediction of what they should bring to pass in their day. For they never brought one-half of any one nation into the visible christian church, nor any at all in one-half of the nations in the world, it is very probable.

If it should be further objected, that it is an evidence that Gentile Christians are visible saints, according to the New-Testament notion of visible saintship, in the very same manner as the whole Jewish nation were till they were broken off by their obstinate rejection of the Messiah; that the Gentile Christians are represented as being _grafted into the same olive, _from whence the Jews were _broken off by unbelief, _Rom. xi. 17, &c.

I would inquire, What any one can intend by this objection? Whether it be this, _viz. _That we ought to insist on no higher or better qualifications, in admitting persons as members of the christian church, and to all its privileges, than the whole Jewish nation in Christ’s time possessed, till they had obstinately persisted in their rejection of him? If this is _not _intended, the objection is nothing to the purpose: or, if this _be _intended, neither then is it to the purpose of those with whom I have especially to do in this controversy, who hold _orthodoxy, knowledge _of the fundamental doctrines of religion, _moral sincerity, _and a _good conversation, _to be qualifications, which ought to be insisted on, in order to a visible church-state. For a very great part of those Jews were destitute of these qualifications; many of them were Sadducees, who denied a future state; others of them Herodians, who were occasional conformists with the Romans in their idolatries; the prevailing sect among them were Pharisees, who openly professed the false doctrine of justification by the works of the law and external privileges, that _leaven of the Pharisees, _which Christ warns his disciples to beware of. Many of them were scandalously _ignorant, _for their teachers had taken away the key of knowledge. Multitudes were grossly _vicious, _for it was a generation in which all manner of sin and wickedness prevailed.

I think that text in Rom. xi.. can be understood no otherwise, in any consistence with plain fact, than that the Gentile Christians succeeded the Jews, who had been, either in themselves or ancestors, the children of Abraham, with respect to a visible interest in the covenant of grace, until they were broken off from the church, and ceased to be visible saints by their open and obstinate unbelief. Indeed their ancestors had all been thus broken off from the church of visible saints; for every branch or family of the stock of Jacob had been in the church of visible saints, and each branch withered and failed through unbelief. This was the highest and most important sense, in which any of the Jews were externally the children of Abraham, and implied the greatest privileges. But there was another sense, in which the whole nation, including even those of them who were no visible saints, were his children, which (as has been shown) implied great privileges, wherein christian Gentiles do not succeed them, though they have additional ecclesiastical privileges, vastly beyond the Jews.

Whether I have succeeded, in rightly explaining these matters, or no, yet my failing in it is of no great importance with regard to the strength of the objection, that occasioned my attempting it; which was, that scandalously _wicked _men among the Jews are called _God’s people, _&c. The objection, as I observed, is as much against the scheme of those whom I oppose, as against my scheme; and therefore it as much concerns _them, _to find out some explanation of the matter, that shall show something else is intended by it, than their having the qualifications of visible saints, as it does me; and a failing in such an attempt as much affects and hurts their cause, as it does mine.

##### OBJECT. III.

Those in Israel, who made no profession of piety of heart, did according to divine institution partake of the _passover_; a Jewish _sacrament, _representing the same things, and a seal of the very same covenant of grace, with the _Lord’s supper_; and particularly, it would be unreasonable to suppose, that all made a profession of godliness whom God commanded to keep that first _passover _in Egypt, which the whole congregation were required to keep, and there is no shadow of any such thing as all first making a solemn public profession of those things wherein true piety consists: and so the people in general partook of the _passover, _from generation to generation; but it would be improbable to suppose, that they all professed a supreme regard to God in their hearts.

Answ. 1. The affair of the Israelites’ participation of the _passover, _and particularly that first _passover _in Egypt, is attended with altogether as much difficulty in regard to the qualifications which the _objectors _themselves suppose requisite in communicants at the Lord’s table, as with regard to those which I insist upon; and if there be any argument in the case, it is fully as strong an argument against _their _scheme, as mine.

_One _thing they insist upon as a requisite qualification for the Lord’s supper, is a public profession of religion as to the essential _doctrines _of it. But there is no more public profession of this kind, preceding that passover in Egypt, than of a profession of godliness. Here, not to insist on the great doctrines of the _fall_ _of man, _of our _undone state by nature, _of the _Trinity, _of our _dependence on the free grace of God for justification, _&c. let us take only those two doctrines of a_ future state of rewards and punishments, _and the doctrine of _the Messiah to come, _that Messiah who was represented in the _passover_. Is there any more appearance, in sacred story, of the people making a public profession in Egypt of these doctrines, before they partook of the passover, than of their making profession of the love of God? And is there any more probability of the former, than of the latter? _Another _thing which they on the other side suppose necessary to a due attendance on the Lord’s supper, is, that when any have openly been guilty of gross sins, they should before they come to this sacrament, openly _confess _and _humble _themselves for their faults. Now it is evident by many scriptures, that a great part of the children of Israel in Egypt had been guilty of joining with the Egyptians in worshipping their false gods, and had lived in _idolatry. _But the history in Exodus gives us no account of any public solemn confession of, or humiliation, for this great sin, before they came to the passover. Mr. Stoddard observes, (_Appeal, _p. 58, 59.) that there was in the church of Israel a way appointed by God for the removal of scandals; men being required in that case to offer up their _sacrifices, _attended with _confession _and visible signs of _repentance. _But where do we read of the people offering up sacrifices in Egypt, attended with confession, for removing the scandal of that most heinous sin of _idolatry _they had lived in? Or is there any more probability of their publicly professing their repentance and humiliation for their sin, before their celebrating the passover, than of their publicly professing to love God above all? _Another _thing which they suppose to be requisite in order to admission to the Lord’s table, and about which they would have a particular care to be taken, is, that every person admitted give evidence of a competent _knowledge _in the doctrines of religion, and none be allowed to partake who are grossly ignorant. Now there is no more appearance of this with regard to the congregation in Egypt, than of a _profession of godliness_; and it is as difficult to suppose it. There is abundant reason to suppose, that vast numbers in that nation, consisting of more than a million of adult persons, had been brought up in a great degree of ignorance, amidst their slavery in Egypt, where the people seem to have almost forgotten the true God and the true religion. And though pains had been taken by Moses, now for a short season, to instruct the people better; yet it must be considered, it is a very great work, to take a whole nation under such degrees of ignorance and prejudice, and bring every one of them to a competent degree of knowledge in religion; and a greater work still for Moses both thus to instruct them, and also by examination or otherwise, to come to a just satisfaction, that all had indeed attained to such knowledge.

Mr. Stoddard insists, that if grace be requisite in the Lord’s supper, it would have been as much so in the _passover, _inasmuch as the chief thing which the _passover _(as well as the Lord’s supper) represents, is Christ’s sufferings. But if, on this account, the same qualifications are requisite in both ordinances, then it would be as requisite that the partakers should have knowledge to _discern the Lord’s body, _(in Mr. Stoddard’s sense of 1 Cor. xi. 29..) in the _passover, _as in the Lord’s supper. But this certainly is as difficult to suppose, as that they professed godliness. For how does it appear, that the people in general who partook of the _passover_—knew that it signified the death of the _Messiah, _and the way in which he should make atonement for sin by his blood? Does it look very likely that they should know this, when Christ’s own disciples had not knowledge thus to _discern the Lord’s body _in the _passover, _of which they partook from year to year with their Master? Can it be supposed, they actually knew Christ’s death and the design of it to be thereby signified, when they did not so much as realize the fact itself, that Christ was to die, at least not till the year before the last passover? Besides, how unreasonable would it be, to suppose, that the Jews understood what was signified, pertaining to Christ and salvation by him, in all those many kinds of sacrifices, which they attended and partook of, and all the vast variety of ceremonies belonging to them; all which sacrifices were sacramental representations of Christ’s death, as well as the sacrifice of the passover! The apostle tells us, that all these things had a _shadow of good things to come, _the things concerning _Christ_: and yet there are many of them, which the church of Christ to this day does not understand; though we are under a thousand times greater advantage to understand them, than they were. For we have the _New Testament, _wherein God uses _great plainness of speech, _to guide us, and live in days wherein the _vail _which Moses put over his face is taken away in Christ, and the vail of the temple rent, and have the substance and antitype plainly exhibited, and so have opportunity to compare these with those shadows.

If it be objected, as a difficulty that lies against our supposing a profession of godliness requisite to a participation of the _passover, _that they who were _uncircumcised _were expressly forbidden to partake, and if conversion was as important and a more important qualification than circumcision, why were not the _unregenerate _as expressly forbidden? I answer; Why were not _scandalous _sinners as expressly forbidden? And why was not _moral sincerity _as expressly required as circumcision?

If it be objected, that they were _all _expressly and strictly required to keep the passover; but if grace was requisite, and God knew that many of the partakers would have no grace, why would he give such universal orders?

I answer; When God gave those commands, he knew that the commands, in all their strictness, would reach many persons who in the time of the _passover _would be without so much as _moral sincerity _in religion. Every man in the nation, from the first institution till the death of Christ, were all (excepting such as were ceremonially unclean, or on a journey) strictly required to keep the feast of _passover_; and yet God knew that multitudes would be without the qualification of _moral seriousness _in religion. It would be very unreasonable to suppose, that every single person in the nation was morally serious, even in the very best time, or that ever there was such a happy day with any nation under heaven, wherein all were morally sincere in religion. How much then was it otherwise many times with that nation, which was so prone to corruption, and so often generally involved in gross wickedness! But the strict command of God to keep the _passover _reached the morally _insincere, _as well as others; they are no where excepted, any more than the _unconverted. _And as to any general commands of God’s word, these no more required men to turn from a state of moral insincerity before they came to the _passover, _than they required them to turn from a graceless state.

But further, I reply, that God required them all to keep the _passover, _no more strictly than he required them all to _love _the Lord their God with their whole heart. And if God might strictly command this, he might also strictly command them to keep that ordinance wherein they were especially to profess it, and seal their profession of it. That _evil generation _were not expressly forbidden to keep the _passover _in succeeding years, for the whole _forty years _during which they went on provoking God, very often by gross sin and open rebellion; but still the express and strict commands for the whole congregation to keep the _passover _reached them, nor were they released from their obligation.

If it be said, that we must suppose multitudes in Israel attended the _passover, _from age to age, without such a _visibility _of _piety _as I have insisted on; and yet we do not find their attending this ordinance charged on them as a _sin, _in Scripture: I answer; We must also suppose that multitudes in Israel, from age to age, attended the passover, who lived in _moral insincerity, _yea and _scandalous wickedness. _For the people in general very often notoriously corrupted themselves, and declined to ways of open and great transgression; and yet there is reason to think, that in these times of corruption, for the most part, they held _circumcision _and the _passover_; and we do not find their attending on these ordinances under such circumstances, any more expressly charged on them as a sin, than their coming without piety of heart. The _ten tribes _continued constantly in _idolatry _for about 250 years, and there is a ground to suppose, that in the mean time they ordinarily kept up circumcision and the passover. For though they worshipped God by images, yet they maintained most of the ceremonial observances of the law of Moses, called _the manner of the God of the land, _which their priests taught the Samaritans who were settled in their stead, 2 Kings xvii. 26, 27.. Nevertheless we do not find Elijah, Elisha, or other prophets, reproving them for attending these ordinances without the required moral qualifications. Indeed there are some things in the writings of the prophets, which may be interpreted as a reproof of this; but no more as a reproof of this, than of attending God’s ordinances without a gracious sincerity and true piety of heart and life.

How many seasons were there, wherein the people in general fell into and lived in _idolatry, _that scandal of scandals, in the times of the judges, and of the kings both in Judah and Israel! But still amidst all this wickedness, they continued to attend the sacrament of _circumcision. _We have every whit as much evidence of it, as that they attended the _passover _without a profession of godliness. We have no account of their ever leaving it off at such seasons, nor any hint of its being renewed (as a thing which had ceased) when they came to reform. Though we have so full an account of the particulars of Josiah’s reformation, after the long and scandalous reign of Manasseh, there is no hint of any reviving of _circumcision, _or returning to it after a cessation. And where have we an account of the people being once reproved for attending this holy sacrament while thus involved in _scandalous _sin, in all the Old Testament? And where is this once charged on them as a sin, any more than in the case of unconverted persons attending the sacrament of the _passover_?_(_

Answ. 2. Whatever was the case with respect to the qualifications for the sacraments of the Old-Testament dispensation, I humbly conceive it is nothing to the purpose in the present argument, nor needful to determine us with respect to the qualifications for the sacraments of the _christian _dispensation, which is a matter of such plain fact in the New Testament. Far am I from thinking the Old Testament to be like an old almanack out of use; nay, I think it is evident from the New Testament, that some things which had their first institution under the Old Testament, are continued under the New; for instance, the acceptance of the infant-seed of believers as children of the covenant with their parents; and probably some things belonging to the order and discipline of christian churches, had their first beginning in the Jewish synagogue. But yet all allow that the Old-Testament _dispensation _is out of date, with its ordinances; and I think, in a matter pertaining to the constitution and order of the _New-Testament church—a _matter of fact, wherein the _New Testament _itself is express, full, and abundant—to have recourse to the Mosaic dispensation for rules or precedents to determine our judgment, is quite needless, and out of reason. There is perhaps no part of divinity attended with so much intricacy, and wherein orthodox divines do so much differ, as the stating of the precise agreement and difference between the two dispensations of Moses and of Christ. On this “precise agreement and difference,” Dr. Owen has written with admirable clearness in his Exposition to the Epistle to the Hebrews and the prefixed exercitation.—W. And probably the reason why God has left it so intricate, is, because our understanding the ancient dispensation, and God’s design in it, is not of so great importance, nor does it so nearly concern us. Since God uses great plainness of speech in the New Testament, which is as it were the charter and municipal law of the christian church, what need we run back to the ceremonial and typical institutions of an antiquated dispensation, wherein God’s declared design was, to deliver divine things in comparative obscurity, hid under a veil, and involved in clouds?

We have no more occasion for going to search among the types, dark revelations, and carnal ordinances of the Old Testament, to find out whether this matter of fact concerning the constitution and order of the New-Testament church be true, than we have occasion for going there to find out whether any other matter of fact, of which we have an account in the New Testament, be true; as particularly, whether there were such officers in the primitive church as _bishops _and _deacons, _whether _miraculous _gifts of the Spirit were common in the apostles’ days, whether the believing Gentiles were received into the primitive christian church, and the like.

Answ. 3. I think, nothing can be alleged from, the Holy Scripture, sufficient to prove a _profession of godliness _to be not a qualification requisite in order to a due and regular participation of the _passover._

Although none of the requisite moral qualifications for this Jewish sacrament, are near so clearly made known in the Old Testament, as the qualifications for the _christian _sacraments are in the New; and although a supposed visibility of either moral sincerity or sanctifying grace, is involved in some obscurity and difficulty; yet I would humbly offer what appears to me to be the truth concerning that matter, in the things that follow.

(1.) Although the people in Egypt before the _first passover, _probably made no _explicit _public profession at all, either of their _humiliation for their former idolatry _or of _present devotedness of heart to God_; it being before any particular institution of an express public profession, either of godliness, or repentance in case of scandal: yet I think, there was some sort of _public manifestation, _or _implicit profession _of both.—Probably in Egypt they implicitly professed the same things, which they afterwards professed more expressly and solemnly in the _wilderness. _The Israelites in Egypt had very much to affect their hearts, before the last plague, in the great things that God had done for them; especially in some of the latter plagues, wherein they were so remarkably distinguished from the Egyptians. They seem now to be brought to a tender frame, and a disposition to show much respect to God; (see Exod. xii. 27..) and were probably now very forward to profess themselves devoted to him, and true penitents.

(2.) After the institution of an _explicit public profession _of devotedness to God, or (which is the same thing) of true piety of heart, this was wont to be required in order to a partaking of the _passover _and other sacrifices and sacraments that adult persons were admitted to. Accordingly all the adult persons that were circumcised at Gilgal, had made this profession a little before on the plains of Moab. Not that all of them were truly gracious; but seeing they all had a profession and visibility, Christ in his dealings with his church as to external things, acted not as the Searcher of hearts, but as the Head of the visible church, accommodating himself to the present state of mankind; and therefore he represents himself in Scripture as _trusting _his people’s profession; as I formerly observed.

(3.) In _degenerate _times in Israel, both priests and people were very _lax _with respect to covenanting with God, and professing devotedness to him; and these professions were used, as public professions commonly are still in corrupt times, merely as matters of _form _and _ceremony, _at least by great multitudes.

(4.) Such was the nature of the Levitical dispensation, that it had in no measure so great a tendency to preclude and prevent _hypocritical professions, _as the _New-Testament dispensation_; particularly, on account of the vastly greater _darkness _of it. For the covenant of grace was not then so fully revealed, and consequently the nature of the conditions of that covenant was not then so well known. There was then a far more obscure revelation of those great duties of repentance towards God and faith in the Mediator, and of those things wherein true holiness consists, and wherein it is distinguished from other things. Persons then had not equal advantage to know their own hearts, while viewing themselves in this comparatively dim light of Moses’ law, as now they have in the clear sun-shine of the gospel. In that state of the minority of the church, the nature of true piety, as consisting in the _Spirit of adoption, _or ingenuous filial love to God, and as distinguished from a _spirit of bondage, _servile fear, and self-love, was not so clearly made known. The Israelites were therefore the more ready to mistake for true piety, that moral seriousness and those warm affections and resolutions that resulted from that _spirit of bondage, _which showed itself in Israel remarkably at mount Sinai; and to which through all the Old-Testament times, they were especially incident.

(5.) God was pleased in a great measure _to suffer _(though he did not properly _allow) _a _laxness _among the people, with regard to the visibility of holiness, and the moral qualifications requisite to an attendance on their sacraments. This he also did in many other cases of great irregularity, under that dark, imperfect, and comparatively carnal dispensation; such as polygamy, putting away their wives at pleasure, the revenging of blood, killing the man-slayer, &c. And he _winked at _their worshipping in high places in Solomon’s time, (1 Kings iii. 4, 5..) the neglect of keeping the feast of tabernacles according to the law, from Joshua’s time till after the captivity, (Neh. viii. 17..) and the neglect of the synagogue-worship, or the public service of God in particular congregations, till after the captivity, Prid. Connect. Part I. p. 354—536. and 555, 556. 9th Edit. The word translated synagogues, Psal. lxxiv. 8. signifies assemblies; and is supposed by the generality of learned men to relate to another sort of assemblies. though the light of nature, together with the general rules of the law of Moses, did sufficiently teach and require it.

(6.) It seems to be foretold in the prophecies of the Old Testament, that there would be a great _alteration _in this respect, in the days of the gospel; that under the new dispensation there should be far _greater purity _in the church. Thus, in the forementioned place in Ezekiel it is foretold, that “those who are [_visibly_] uncircumcised in heart, should no more enter into God’s sanctuary.” Again, Ezek. xx. 37, 38.. “And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and will bring you into the bond of the covenant; and I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me.” It seems to be a prophecy of the greater purity of those who are visibly _in covenant with God_. Isa. iv. 3. “And it shall come to pass that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living [_i. e. has a name to live,_ or is enrolled among the saints] in Jerusalem.” Isa. lii. 1. “Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; from henceforth there shall no more come to thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.” Zech. xiv. 21. “And in that day, there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord.”

(7.) This is just such an alteration as might reasonably be expected from what we are taught of the whole _nature_ of the _two dispensations_. As the one had _carnal ordinances,_ (so they are called Heb. ix. 10..) the other a _spiritual_ service; (John iv. 24..) the one an _earthly_ Canaan, the other a _heavenly_; the one an _external_ Jerusalem, the other a _spiritual_; the one an _earthly_ high priest, the other a _heavenly_; the one a _worldly_ sanctuary, the other a _spiritual_; the one a _bodily_ and _temporal_ redemption, (which is all that they generally discerned or understood in the _passover,_) the other a _spiritual _and_ eternal_. And agreeably to these things, it was so ordered in providence, that Israel, the congregation that should enter this _worldly_ sanctuary, and attend these _carnal_ ordinances, should be much more a _worldly, carnal_ congregation, than the New-Testament congregation. One reason of such a difference seems to be this, _viz_. That the _Messiah_ might have the honour of introducing a state of greater purity and spiritual glory. Hence God is said to find _fault_ with the ancient dispensation of the covenant, Heb. viii. 7, 8.. And the time of introducing the new dispensation is called the time of _reformation,_ Heb. ix. 10.. And one thing, wherein the amendment of what God found fault with in the former dispensation should consist, the apostle intimates, is the greater _purity_ and _spirituality_ of the church, Heb. viii. 7, 8, 11..

##### OBJECT. IV.

it is not reasonable to suppose, that the multitudes which John the Baptist baptized, made a _profession_ of saving grace, or had any such _visibility_ of true piety, as has been insisted on.

Answ. Those whom John baptized, _came to him confessing their sins,_ making a profession of some kind of _repentance_; and it is not reasonable to suppose, the repentance they professed was specifically or in kind _diverse_ from that which he had instructed them in, and called them to, which is called _repentance for the remission of sins_; and that is saving repentance. John’s baptism is called _the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins_: I know not how such a phrase can be reasonably understood any otherwise, than so as to imply, that his _baptism_ was some exhibition of that _repentance,_ and a seal of the profession of it. Baptism is a seal of some sort of religious profession, in adult persons: but the very name of John’s baptism shows, that it was a seal of a profession of _repentance for the remission of sins_. It is said, Luke iii. 3. “john preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.” What can be understood by this, but _his preaching_ that men should now speedily _turn to God,_ by true _repentance_ and _faith_ in the promised Saviour, and _come and confess their sins,_ and openly declare this repentance towards God, and faith in the Lamb of God, and that they should confirm and seal this their profession by _baptism, _as well as therein receive the seal of God’s willingness to _remit the sins_ of such as had this faith and repentance. Accordingly, we are told, the _people came and were baptized of him, confessing their sins, _manifesting and professing that sort of _repentance_ and _faith_ which he _preached_. They had no notion of any _other sort_ of repentance put into their heads, that they could suppose John _called_ them to profess in _baptism,_ but this accompanied with _faith_ in the Lamb whom he called them to behold; for he _preached_ no other to them. The people that John baptized, professed both _repentance for the remission of sins,_ and also_ faith in the Messiah_; as is evident by Acts xix. 4, 5. “John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him that should come after him;” _i. e._ on _Christ Jesus_. “When they heard this [John’s preaching] they were baptized in the name of the Lord _Jesus_.”

If it be objected here, that we are told, Matt. iii. 5, 6. “There went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins;” and that it is not to be imagined, _all_ these made any credible profession of saving repentance and faith: I answer; No more is to be understood by these expressions, according to the phraseology of the Scripture, than that there was a very great resort of people from these places to John. Nor is any more to be understood by the like term of universality in John iii. 26.. “They came to John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him;” that is, there was a great resort to him from all quarters. It is in nowise unreasonable to suppose, there was indeed a very great number of people that came to John from the places mentioned, who being exceedingly moved by his preaching, in that time of extraordinary outpouring of the Spirit, made profession of the faith and repentance which John preached. Doubtless there were many more professors than real converts: but still in the great resort to John, there were many of the latter character; as we may infer from the prophecy: as appears by Luke i. 16, 17. “And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.” And from that account of fact in Mark xi. 12. “From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.” And in Luke xvi. 16. “The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and _every man_ presseth into it.” Here the expression is no less universal, than that which is objected in Matt. iii. 5, 6.. As to those wicked Pharisees, that so much opposed Christ, some of them I suppose had been baptized by John, and then had a great show of repentance and faith; but they afterwards apostatized, and were much worse than ever before: therefore Christ speaks of them as being like a _house _from_ which the unclean spirit_ is visibly turned out for _a_ _while,_ and is _left empty, swept, and garnished, _but afterward is _repossessed,_ and has many devils instead of one, Luke xi. 24, &c. Yet as to the greater part of these Pharisees, they were not baptized by John; as appears by Luke vii. 29, 30..

If it be further objected, that John in baptizing such multitudes could not have _time_ to be sufficiently informed of those he baptized, whether their profession of godliness was _credible,_ or no: I answer; That we are not particularly informed of the circumstances of his teaching, and of the assistance he was favoured with, and the means he had of information, concerning those whom he baptized: but we may be sure of one thing, _viz_. He had as much opportunity to inquire into the credibility of their profession, as he had to inquire into their _doctrinal_ knowledge and _moral_ character; which my opponents suppose to be necessary, as well as I: and this is enough to silence the present objection.

##### OBJECT. V.

Christ says, Matt. xx. 16.. and again, Matt. xxii. 14.. that _many are called, but few are chosen_. By which it is evident, that there are _many_ who belong to the _visible church,_ and yet but _few_ real and true _saints_; and that it is ordinarily thus, even under the _New Testament,_ and in days of gospel-light: and therefore that _visibility_ of _saintship,_ whereby persons are visible saints in a scripture sense, cannot imply an apparent probability of their being _real_ saints, or truly gracious persons.

Answ. In these texts, by those that are _called, _are not meant those who are _visible saints,_ and have the requisite qualifications for christian sacraments; but all such as have the _external call_ of the word of God, and have its offers and invitations made to them. And it is undoubtedly true, and has been matter of fact, for the most part, that of those _called_ in this sense, _many_ have been but _only_ called, and never truly obedient to the call, _few_ have been true saints. So it was in the Jewish nation, to which the parable in the twentieth of Matthew has a special respect; in general they had the _external call_ of God’s word, and attended many religious duties, in hopes of God’s favour and reward, which is called_ labouring in God’s vineyard_; and yet but _few_ of them eventually obtained salvation; nay, great multitudes of those who were _called_ in this sense, were _scandalous_ persons, and gross hypocrites. The Pharisees and Sadducees were _called,_ and they _laboured in the vineyard,_ in the sense of the parable; for which they expected great rewards, above the Gentile converts or proselytes; wherefore their _eye was evil_ towards them, and they could not bear that they should be made _equal_ to them. But still these Pharisees and Sadducees had not generally the intellectual and moral qualifications, that my opponents suppose requisite for _christian_ sacraments; being generally scandalous persons, denying some fundamental principles of religion, and explaining away some of its most important precepts. Thus, _many_ in christendom are called, by the outward call of God’s word, and yet _few_ of them are in a state of salvation: but not all who sit under the sound of the gospel, and hear its invitations, are fit to come to _sacraments_.

That by those who are _called, _in this saying of our Saviour, is meant those that have the _gospel-offer,_ and not those who belong to the society of _visible saints,_ is evident beyond all dispute, in Matt. xxii. 14.. By the _many that are called, _are plainly intended the many that are _invited to the wedding_. In the foregoing parable, we have an account of those who from time to time were _bidden,_ or called, (for the word is the same in the original,) verse 3. “And went forth his servants to call them that were called, **NOT ENGLISH** and they would not come.” This has respect to the Jews, who refused not only savingly to come to Christ, but refused so much as to come into the visible church of Christ. Verse 4. “Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, [or called,] Behold I have prepared my dinner,” &c. Verse 8. “They which were bidden [or called] were not worthy,” Verse 9. “Go ye therefore into the high-ways, and as many as ye shall find, bid [or call, **NOT ENGLISH** ] to the marriage,” or nuptial banquet; representing the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles; who upon it came into the _king’s_ _house,_ _i. e._ the visible church, and among them_ one that had not a wedding-garment, who was bound hand and foot, and cast out when the king came_: and then, at the conclusion, Christ adds this remark, verse 14. “For many are called _or_ bidden [**NOT ENGLISH** ] but few are chosen;” which must have reference, not only to the _man_ last mentioned, who came into the wedding-house, the christian visible church, _without a wedding-garment, _but to those also mentioned before, who were _called, _but would not so much as _come into the king’s house,_ or join to the visible christian church. To suppose this saying to have reference only to that _one man_ who came without _a wedding-garment,_ (representing one that comes into the visible church, but is not a true saint,) would be to make the introduction of this aphorism, and its connexion with what went before, very strange and unintelligible, thus, ”_Multitudes_ came into the king’s house, who were _called,_ and the house was full of guests; but among them was found _one_ man who was not _chosen_;_ for many are_ called, _but few are chosen._“

##### OBJECT VI.

When the servants of the householder, in the parable of the wheat and the tares (Matt. xiii..) unexpectedly found _tares_ among the wheat, they said to their master, “Wilt thou that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them; let both grow together until the harvest.” Which shows the mind of Christ, that we ought not to make a _distinction_ between true saints and others in this world, or aim at admitting true saints _only_ into the visible church, but ought to let _both_ be _together_ in the church till the day of _judgment_.

Answ. 1. These things have no reference to _introduction_ into the field, or _admission_ into the visible church, as though no care nor measures should be taken to prevent _tares _being _sown_; or as though the servants who had the charge of the field, would have done well to have taken _tares, _appearing to be such, and _planted _them in the field amongst the wheat: no, instead of this, the parable plainly implies the contrary. But the words cited have wholly respect to a casting out and purging the field, _after _the tares had been introduced _unawares, _and _contrary to design, _through men’s infirmity and Satan’s procurement. Concerning purging the _tares _out of the field, or casting men out of the church, there is no difference between me and those whom I oppose in the present controversy: and therefore it is impossible there should be any objection from that which Christ says here concerning this matter against _me, _but what is as much of an objection against _them_; for we both hold the same thing. It is agreed on all hands, that adult persons, actually admitted to communion in the visible church, however they may behave themselves so as to bring their spiritual state into suspicion, yet ought not to be _cast out, _unless they are obstinate in _heresy _or _scandal_; lest, while we go about to root out the _tares, _we should root out the _wheat _also. And it is also agreed on all hands, that when those represented under the name of _tares _bring forth such evil fruit, such scandalous and obstinate wickedness, as is plainly and visibly inconsistent with the being of true grace, they ought to be _cast out. _And therefore it is impossible that this objection should be any thing to the purpose.

Answ. 2. I think this parable, instead of being a just objection _against _the doctrine I maintain, is on the contrary a clear evidence _for_ it.

For (1.) the parable shows plainly, that if any are introduced into the field of the householder, or church of Christ, who prove to be not _wheat,_ (_i. e._ not true saints,) they are brought in _unawares, _or contrary to design. If _tares _are as properly to be _sown _in the field, as is the _wheat, _which must be the case if the Lord’s supper be a _convertin_g ordinance; then surely no care ought to be taken to introduce _wheat _only, and no respect ought to be had more to the qualities of _wheat _in sowing the field, than the qualities of _tares_; nor is there any more impropriety in the _tares _having a place there, than the _wheat. _But this surely is altogether inconsistent with the scope of the parable.

(2.) This parable plainly shows, that those who are in the visible church, have at first a _visibility, _or appearance to human sight of _true grace, _or of the nature of true saints. For it is observed, _tares _have this property, that when they first appear, and till the products of the field arrive to some maturity, they have such a resemblance of _wheat, _that it is next to impossible to _distinguish _them.

##### OBJECT. VII.

Christ himself administered the Lord’s supper to Judas, whom he knew at the same time to be _graceless_; which is a full evidence, that grace is not _in itself _a requisite qualification in order to coming to the Lord’s supper; and if it be not requisite in itself, a _profession _of it cannot be requisite.

Answ. 1. It is to me apparent, that Judas was not present at the administration of the Lord’s supper. It is true, he was present at the passover, and _dipped with Christ in the _paschal _dish. _The three former evangelists do differ in the order of the account they give of this _dipping in the dish_.—Luke gives an account of it _after _his account of the Lord’s supper, Luke xxii. 21.. But Matthew and Mark both give an account of it _before. _(Matt. xxvi. 23.. Mark xiv. 20.) And the like might be shown in other instances of these three evangelists differing one from another in the _order _of their narratives; one places those things in his history after others, which another places first. These sacred historians do not undertake to declare precisely the _date _of every incident, but regard more the truth of facts, than the order of time. However, in the present case, the nature of the thing speaks for itself, and shows, that _Judas’s dipping with Christ in the dish, _or _his hand being with Christ on the table, _or _receiving a sop dipped in the dish, _must be in that order wherein Matthew and Mark place it in their history, _viz._ at the _passover, _antecedent to the Lord’s supper. For there is no such thing in the Lord’s supper as _dipping of sops, _and _dipping together in the dish_; but there was in the passover, where all had their hands together in the dish, and dipt their sops in the bitter sauce. None of these three evangelists give us any account of the time when Judas went out: but John—who is vastly more particular as to what passed that night, and is every where more exact as to the order of time than the other evangelists—is very precise as to the time, _viz. _that _Jesus when he gave him the sop, _at the same time sent him away, bidding him _do quickly what he intended to do_; and accordingly _when he had received the sop, he went immediately out, _John xiii. 27-30.. Now this sop being at the _passover, _it is evident he was not present at the _Lord’s supper _which followed. Many of the best expositors are of this opinion, such as Van Mastricht, Dr. Doddridge, and others.

Answ. 2. If Judas was there, I deny the consequence. As I have observed once and again concerning the Lord’s dealings with his people under the Old Testament, so under the New the same observation takes place. Christ did not come to _judge the secrets of men, _nor did ordinarily act in his external dealings with his disciples, and in the administration of ordinances, as the _Searcher of hearts_; but rather as the Head of the visible church, proceeding according to what was exhibited in profession and visibility; herein setting an example to his ministers, who should stand in his place when he was gone, and act in his name in the administration of ordinances. Judas had made the same profession of regard to his Master, and of forsaking all for him, as the other disciples: and therefore Christ did not openly renounce him till he himself had destroyed his profession and visibility of saintship, by public scandalous apostacy. Supposing then the presence of Judas at the Lord’s supper, this affords no consequence in favour of what I oppose.

Answ. 3. If they with whom I have to do in this controversy, are not contented with the answers already given, and think there is a remaining difficulty in this matter lying against _my scheme, _I will venture to tell them, that this difficulty lies full as hard against _their own scheme_; and if there be any strength at all in the argument, it is to all intents of the same strength against the need of those _qualifications _which they themselves suppose to be necessary in order to an approach to the Lord’s table. For although they do not think renewing saving grace necessary, yet they suppose _moral seriousness _or (as they variously speak) _moral sincerity _in religion to be necessary. They suppose it to be requisite, that persons should have some kind of serious principle and view in coming to the Lord’s table; some intention of subjecting themselves to Christ, and of seeking and serving him, in general; and in particular some religious end in coming to the sacramental supper, some religious respect to Christ in it. But now did not Christ at that time perfectly know, that Judas had none of these things? He knew he had nothing of _sincerity _in the christian religion, or of regard to _Christ _in that ordinance, of any sort whatsoever; he knew, that _Satan _had _entered into him _and filled his heart, and that he was then cherishing in himself a malignant spirit against his Master, excited by the reproof Christ had lately given him, (compare John xii. 8.. with Matt. xxvi. 8-16.. and Mark xiv. 4-11..) and that he had already formed a traitorous, murderous design against him, and was now in the prosecution of that bloody design, having actually just before been to the chief priests, and agreed with them to _betray _him for thirty pieces of silver. (See Matt. xxvi. 14, 15, 16.. Mark xiv. 10, 11.. Luke xxii. 3-6.. and John xiii. 2..) Christ knew these things, and knew that Judas was utterly unqualified for the _holy _sacrament of the Lord’s supper; though it had not yet been made known to the church, or the disciples.—Therefore it concerns those on the contrary part in this controversy, to find out some solution of this difficulty, as much as it does me; and they will find they have as much need to take refuge in the solution already given, in one or other of the two preceding answers to this objection.

By the way I would observe, that Christ’s not excluding Judas from the passover, under these circumstances, _knowing _him to be thus _unqualified, _without so much as _moral sincerity, _&c. is another thing that effectually enervates all the strength of the objection against me, from the _passover. _For Judas did not only in common with others fall under God’s strict command, in the law of Moses, to keep this feast, without any exception of his case there to be found; but _Christ _himself, with his own hand, gave him the _sop, _a part of the paschal feast; even although at the same instant he had in view the man’s secret wickedness and hypocrisy, the traitorous design which was then in his heart, and the horrid conspiracy with the chief priests, which he had already entered into, and was now prosecuting. This was then in Christ’s mind, and he intimated it to him, at the same moment when he gave him the sop, saying, “What thou doest, do quickly.” This demonstrates, that the objection from the _passover _is no stronger argument against my scheme, than the scheme of those whom I oppose; because it is no stronger against the necessity of _sanctifying grace, _the qualification for christian sacraments, which I insist upon, than it is against the necessity of _moral seriousness _or _sincerity, _the qualification which they insist upon.

##### OBJECT. VIII.

If _sanctifying grace _be a requisite qualification in order to due access to christian sacraments, God would have given some _certain rule, _whereby those who are to admit them, might know whether they have such grace, or not.

Answ. This objection was obviated in my stating the question. However, I will say something further to it in this place; and would observe, that if there be any strength in this objection, it lies in the truth of this proposition, _viz. That whatever qualifications are requisite in order to persons’ due access to christian sacraments, God has given some _certain rule, _whereby those who admit them, may know whether they have those qualifications, or not. _If this proposition is not true, then there is no force at all in the argument. But I dare say, there is not a divine, nor Christian of common sense, on the face of the earth, that will assert and stand to it, that this proposition is true. For none will deny, that some sort of belief of the being of a God, some sort of belief that the Scriptures are the word of God, that there is a future state of rewards and punishments, and that Jesus is the Messiah, are qualifications requisite in order to a due access to christian sacraments; and yet God has given those who are to admit persons no _certain rule, _whereby they may know whether they _believe _any one of these things. Neither has he given his ministers or churches any _certain rule, _whereby they may know whether any person that offers himself for admission to the sacrament, has any degree of _moral sincerity, moral seriousness _of spirit, or any inward moral qualification whatsoever. These things have all their existence in the soul, which is out of our neighbour’s view. Not therefore a _certainty, _but a _profession _and _visibility, _of these things, must be the rule of the church’s proceeding; and it is as good and as reasonable a rule of judgment concerning _saving grace, _as it is concerning any other internal invisible qualifications, which cannot be certainly known by any but the subject himself.

##### OBJECT. IX.

If _sanctifying grace _be requisite to a due approach to the Lord’s table, then no man may come but he that _knows _he has such grace. A man must not only _think _he has a right to the Lord’s supper, in order to his lawful partaking of it; but he must _know _he has a right. If nothing but _sanctification _gives him a _real right _to the Lord’s supper, then nothing short of the _knowledge _of sanctification gives him a _known right _to it: only an _opinion_ and _probable hopes _of a right will not warrant his coming.

Answ. 1. I desire those who insist on this as an invincible argument, to consider calmly whether they themselves ever _did, _or ever _will, _stand to it. For here these two things are to be observed:

(1.) If no man may warrantably come to the Lord’s supper, but such as _know _they have a _right, _then no _unconverted _persons may come unless they not only _think, _but _know, _it is the _mind of God, _that unconverted persons should come, and _know _that he does not require _grace _in order to their coming. For unless they know that men may come _without _grace, they cannot _know _that they themselves have a _right _to come, _being without grace. _And will any one assert and stand to it, that of necessity all adult persons, of every age, rank, and condition of life, must be so versed in this controversy, as to have a certainty in this matter, in order to their coming to the Lord’s supper? It would he most absurd for any to assert it to be a point of easy proof, the evidence of which is so clear and obvious to every one of every capacity, as to supersede all occasion for their being studied in divinity, in order to a certainty of its truth, that persons may come to the sacred table of the Lord, notwithstanding they _know _themselves to be _unconverted_! Especially considering, that the contrary to this opinion has been in general the judgment of protestant divines and churches, from the Reformation to this day; and that the most of the greatest divines that have ever appeared in the world, who have spent their lives in the diligent prayerful study of divinity, have been fixed in the reverse of that opinion. This is sufficient at least to show, that this opinion is not so plain as not to be a disputable point; and that the evidence of it is not so obvious to persons of the lowest capacity and little inquiry, as that all may come to a certainty in the matter, without difficulty and without study. I would humbly ask here, What has been the case in fact in _our _churches, who have practised for so many years on this principle? Can it be pretended, or was it ever supposed, that the communicants in general, even persons of mean intellects and low education, not excepting the very boys and girls of sixteen years old, that have been taken into the church, had so studied divinity, as not only to _think, _but _know, _that our pious forefathers, and almost all the protestant and christian divines in the world, have been in an _error _in this matter? And have people ever been taught the _necessity _of this previous knowledge? Has it ever been insisted upon, that before persons come to the Lord’s supper, they must look so far into the case of a _right _to the Lord’s supper, as to come not only to a full settled opinion, but even _certainty, _in this point? And has any one minister or church in their admissions ever proceeded on the supposition, that all whom they took into communion were so versed in this controversy, as this comes to? Has it ever been the manner to examine them as to their thorough acquaintance with this particular controversy? Has it been the manner to put by those who had only an opinion and not a certainty; even as the _priests _who could not find their _register, _were put by, till the matter could be determined by Urim and Thummim? And I dare appeal to every minister, and every member of a church that has been concerned in admitting communicants, whether they ever imagined, or it ever entered into their thought, concerning each one to whose admission they have consented, that they had looked so much into this matter, as not only to have settled their _opinion, _but to be arrived to a proper _certainty_?

(2.) I desire it may be remembered, that the venerable author of the _Appeal to the Learned, _did in his ministry ever teach such doctrine from whence it will unavoidably follow, that no one _unconverted _man in the world can _know he_ has a warrant to come to the Lord’s supper. For if any unconverted man has a warrant to worship his Maker in this way, it must be because God has given him such warrant by the revelation of his mind in the Holy Scriptures. And therefore if any unconverted man not only _thinks, but knows, _he has a warrant from God, he must of consequence, not only _think, _but _know, _that the Scriptures are the word of God. But I believe all that survive of the stated hearers of that eminent divine, and all who were acquainted with him, well remember it to be a doctrine which he often taught and much insisted on, that no natural man _knows _the Scripture to be the word of God; that although such may _think _so, yet they do not _know _it; and that at best they have but a _doubtful opinion_: and he often would express himself thus; _No natural man is thoroughly convinced, that the Scriptures are the word of God_;_ if they were convinced, they would be gained. _Now if so, it is impossible any natural man in the world should ever _know, _it is his right, in his present condition, to come to the Lord’s supper. True, he may _think _it is his right, he may have that _opinion_: but he cannot know it; and so must not come, according to this argument. For it is only the _word of God _in the Holy Scriptures, that gives a man a _right _to worship the Supreme Being in this sacramental manner, and to come to him in this way, or any other, as one in covenant with him. The Lord’s supper being no branch of natural worship, reason without institution is no ground of duty or right in this affair. And hence it is plainly impossible for those that do not so much as _know _the Scriptures are the word of God, to _know _they have any good ground of duty or right in this matter. Therefore, supposing unconverted men have a real right, yet since they have no _known _right, they have no warrant (according to the argument before us) to take and use their right; and what good then can their right do them? Or how can they excuse themselves from presumption, in claiming a _right, _which they do not _know_ belongs to them?—It is said, a _probable hope _that persons are regenerate, will not warrant them to come; if they come, they take a liberty to do that which they do not _know_ God gives them leave to do, which is horrible presumption in them. But if this be good arguing, I may as well say, a _probable opinion _that unregenerate men may communicate, will not warrant such to do it. They must have _certain knowledge _of this; else their _right _being uncertain, they run a dreadful venture in coming.

Answ. 2. Men are liable to doubt concerning their _moral sincerity, _as well as saving grace. Suppose an unconverted man, sensible of his being under the reigning power of sin, was about to appear solemnly to _own the covenant, _(as it is commonly called,) and to profess to give up himself to the service of God in an universal and persevering obedience; and suppose at the same time he knew, that if he sealed this profession at the Lord’s supper, without _moral sincerity, _(supposing him to understand the meaning of that phrase,) he should _eat and drink judgment _to himself; and if accordingly, his conscience being awakened, he was _afraid of God’s judgment_; in this case, I believe, the man would be every whit as liable to doubts about his _moral sincerity, _as godly men are about their gracious sincerity. And if it be not matter of fact, that natural men are so often exercised and troubled with doubts about their _moral sincerity, _as godly men are about their regeneration, I suppose it to be owing only to this cause, _viz. _that godly men being of more tender consciences than those under the dominion of sin, are more afraid of God’s judgments, and more ready to tremble at his word. The divines on the other side of the question, suppose it to be requisite, that communicants should believe the fundamental doctrines of religion _with all their heart,_ (in the sense of Acts viii. 37..) the doctrine of _Three Persons and one God, _in particular. But I think there can be no reasonable doubt, that natural men—who have so weak and poor a kind of faith in these mysteries—if they were indeed as much afraid of the terrible consequences of their being deceived in being not _morally sincere _in their profession of the truth, as truly gracious men are wont to be of delusion concerning their experience of a work of grace—or whether they are evangelically sincere in choosing God for their portion—the former would be as frequently exercised with doubts in the one case, as the latter in the other. And I very much question, whether any divine on the other side of the controversy would think it necessary, that natural men in professing those things should mean that they _know _they are _morally sincere, _or intend any more than that they trust they have that sincerity, so far as they know their own hearts. If a man should come to them, proposing to join with the church, and tell them, though indeed he was something afraid whether he believed the doctrine of the Trinity _with all his heart, _(meaning in a moral sense,) yet that he had often _examined _himself as to that matter with the utmost impartiality and strictness he was capable of, and on the whole he found reasons of probable hope, and his preponderating thought of himself was, that he was _sincere _in it; would they think such an one ought to be rejected, or would they advise him not to come to the sacrament, because he did not certainly _know _he had this sincerity, but only _thought _he had it?

Answ. 3. If we suppose sanctifying grace requisite in order to be properly qualified, according to God’s word, for an attendance on the Lord’s supper; yet it will not follow, that a man must _know _he has this qualification, in order to his being capable of _conscientiously _attending it. If he _judges _that he has it, according to the best light he can obtain, on the most careful examination, with the improvement of such helps as he can get, the advice of his pastor, &c. he may be bound in _conscience _to attend. And the reason is this; Christians partaking of the Lord’s supper is not a matter of mere _claim, _or _right _and _privilege,_ but a matter of _duty_ and _obligation_; being an affair wherein God has a _claim_ and _demand on us._ And as we ought to be careful, on the one hand, that we proceed on good grounds in taking to ourselves a privilege, lest we take what we have no good claim to; so we should be equally careful, on the other hand, to proceed on good grounds in what we withhold from another, lest we do not withhold that from him which is his due, and which he justly challenges from us. Therefore in a case of this complex nature, where a timing is both a matter of _right_ or _privilege_ to us, and also a matter of _obligation_ to another, or a _right_ of his from us, the danger of proceeding _without_ right and truth is equal both ways; and consequently, if we cannot be absolutely sure either way, here the best judgment we can form, after all proper endeavours to know the truth, must govern and determine us; otherwise we shall designedly do that whereby, according to our own judgment, we run the greatest risk; which is certainly contrary to reason. If the question were only what a man has a _right to,_ he might forbear till he were sure: but the question is, not only whether _he_ has right to attend the supper, but whether _God_ also has not a right to his attendance there? Supposing it were merely a privilege which I am allowed but not commanded, in a certain _specified case,_ then, supposing I am uncertain _whether that be the case with we or no,_ it will be safest to abstain. But supposing I am not only forbidden to take it, unless that be the case with me, but positively commanded and required to take it, if that be the case in fact, then it is equally dangerous to neglect on uncertainties, as to _take_ on uncertainties. In such a critical situation, a man must act according to the best of his judgment on his case; otherwise he wilfully runs into that which he thinks the greatest danger of the two.

Thus it is in innumerable cases in human life. I shall give one plain instance: A man ought not to take upon him the work of the _ministry,_ unless _called_ to it in the providence of God; for a man has no right to _take this honour to himself unless called of God._ Now let us suppose a young man, of a liberal education, and well accomplished, to be at a loss whether it is the will of God that he should follow the work of the ministry; and he examines himself, and examines his circumstances, with great seriousness and solemn prayer, and well considers and weighs the appearances in divine providence: and yet when he has done all, he is not come to a proper certainty, that God calls him to this work; but however, it looks so to him, according to the best light he can obtain, and the most careful judgment he can form: now such an one appears _obliged in conscience_ to give himself to this work. He must by no means neglect it under a notion that he must not _take this honour to himself,_ till he _knows_ he has a _right_ to it; because, though it be indeed a _privilege,_ yet it is not a matter of _mere_ privilege, but a matter of duty too; and if he neglects it _under these circumstances,_ he neglects what, according to his own best judgment, he _thinks_ God requires of him, and calls him to; which is to sin against his _conscience._

As to the case of the priests, that could not find their _register, _(Ezra ii..) alleged in _the Appeal to the Learned, _p. 64. it appears to me of no force in this argument; for if those _priests _had never so great _assurance _in themselves of their pedigree being good, or of their being descended from _priests, _and should have _professed _such assurance, yet it would not have availed. Nor did they abstain from the _priesthood, _because they wanted satisfaction themselves, but they were subject to the judgment of the _Sanhedrim. _God had never made any profession of the parties themselves, but the visibility of the thing, and evidence of the fact to their own eyes, as the rule to judge of the qualification; this matter of _pedigree _being an external object, ordinarily within the view of man; and not any qualification of heart. But this is not the case with regard to requisite qualifications for the _Lord’s supper. _These being many of them internal invisible things, seated in the mind and heart, such as the _belief _of a Supreme Being, &c. God has made a credible _profession _of these things the rule to direct in admission of persons to the ordinance. In making this profession they are determined and governed by their own judgment of themselves, and not by any thing within the view of the church.

##### OBJECT. X.

The natural consequence of the doctrine which has been maintained, is the bringing multitudes of persons of a _tender conscience _and true piety into great _perplexities_; who being at a loss about the state of their souls, must needs be as much in suspense about their duty: and it is not reasonable to suppose, that God would order things so in the revelations of his will, as to _bring his own people into such perplexities._

Answ. 1. It is for _want _of the like tenderness of conscience which the godly have, that the other doctrine which insists on _moral sincerity, _does not naturally bring those who are received to communion on those principles, into the same _perplexities, _through their doubting of their _moral sincerity, _of their believing mysteries _with all their heart, _&c. as has been already observed. And being _free _from perplexity, only through _stupidity _and hardness of heart, is _worse _than being in the greatest perplexity through tenderness of conscience.

Answ. 2. Supposing the doctrine which I have maintained, be indeed the doctrine of _God’s word, _yet it will not follow, that the _perplexities _true saints are in through doubting of their state, are effects owing to the _revelations of God’s word. _Perplexity and distress of mind, not only on occasion of the Lord’s supper, but innumerable other occasions, is the natural and unavoidable consequence of true Christians _doubting of their state. _But shall we therefore say, that all these perplexities are owing to the _word of God_? No, it is not owing to God, nor to any of his revelations, that true saints ever doubt of their state; his revelations are plain and clear, and his rules sufficient for men to determine their own condition by. But, for the most part, it is owing to their own _sloth, _and giving way to their _sinful _dispositions. Must God’s institutions and revelations be answerable for all the perplexities men bring on themselves, through their own negligence and unwatchfulness? It is wisely ordered that the saints should escape perplexity in no other way than that of great strictness, diligence, and maintaining the lively, laborious, and self-denying exercises of religion.

It might as well be said, it is unreasonable to suppose that God should order things so as to bring his own people into such perplexities, as doubting saints are wont to be exercised with, in the sensible approaches of _death_; when their doubts tend to vastly greater _perplexity, _than in their approaches to the Lord’s table. If Christians would more thoroughly _exercise themselves unto godliness, _labouring always to _keep a conscience void of offence both towards God and towards man, _it would be the way to have the comfort and taste the sweetness of religion. If they would _so _run, _not as uncertainly_;_ so fight, not as they that beat the air_; it would be the way for them to escape perplexity, both in ordinances and providences, and to rejoice and enjoy God in both.—Not but that doubting of their state sometimes arises from other causes, besides want of watchfulness; it may arise from melancholy, and some other peculiar disadvantages. But however, it is not owing to God’s revelations nor institutions; which, whatsoever we may suppose them to be, will not prevent the perplexities of _such _persons.

Answ. 3. It appears to me reasonable to suppose, that the doctrine I maintain, if _universally _embraced by God’s people—however it might be an accidental occasion of _perplexity _in many instances, through their own infirmity and sin—would, on the whole, be a happy occasion of much more _comfort_ to the saints than trouble, as it would have a tendency, on every return of the Lord’s supper, to put them on the strictest examination and trial of the state of their souls, agreeable to that rule of the apostle, 1 Cor. xi. 28.. The _neglect _of which great duty of frequent and thorough _self-examination, _seems to be one main cause of the darkness and perplexity of the saints, and the reason why they have so little comfort in ordinances, and so little comfort in general.—Mr. Stoddard often taught his people, that _assurance _is _attainable, _and that those who are true saints might know it, if they would; _i. e. _if they would use proper means and endeavours in order to it.—And if so, then certainly it is not just, to charge those perplexities on _God’s institutions, _which arise through _men’s negligence_; nor would it be just on the supposition of God’s institutions being such as I suppose them to be.

##### OBJECT. XI.

You may as well say, that unsanctified persons may not attend _any _duty of divine worship whatsoever, as that they may not attend the Lord’s supper; for all duties of worship are _holy _and _require holiness, _in order to an acceptable performance of them, as well as that.

Answ. If this argument has any foundation at all, it has its foundation in the supposed truth of the following _propositions, viz. Whosoever is qualified for admission to one duty of divine worship, is qualified for admission to all_; and _he that is unqualified for one, and may be forbidden one, is unqualified for all, and ought to be allowed to attend none. _But certainly these propositions are not true. There are many _qualified _for some duties of worship, and may be _allowed _to attend them, who yet are _not _qualified for some others, nor by any means to be admitted to them. As every body grants, the unbaptized, the excommunicated, heretics, scandalous livers, &c. may be admitted to hear the _word _preached; nevertheless they are not to be allowed to come to the Lord’s supper. Even excommunicated persons remain still under the law of the Sabbath, and are not to be forbidden to observe the Lord’s day. Ignorant persons, such as have not knowledge sufficient for an approach to the Lord’s table, yet are not excused from the duty of prayer: they may pray to God to instruct them, and assist them in obtaining knowledge. They who have been educated in Arianism and Socinianism, and are not yet brought off from these fundamental errors, and so are by no means to be admitted to the Lord’s supper, yet may pray to God to assist them in their studies, and guide them into the truth, and for all other mercies which they need. Socrates, that great Gentile philosopher, who worshipped the true God, as he was led by the light of nature, might pray to God, and he attended his duty when he did so; although he knew not the revelation which God had made of himself in his word. That great philosopher, Seneca, who was contemporary with the apostle Paul, held one Supreme Being, and had in many respects right notions of the divine perfections and providence, though he did not embrace the gospel, which at that day was preached in the world: yet might pray to that Supreme Being whom he acknowledged. And if his brother Gallio at Corinth, when Paul preached there, had prayed to this Supreme Being to guide him into the truth, that he might know whether the doctrine Paul preached was true, he therein would have acted very becoming a reasonable creature, and any one would have acted unreasonably in forbidding him; but yet surely neither of these men was qualified for the christian sacrament. So that it is apparent there is and ought to be a _distinction _made between duties of worship, with respect to qualifications for them; and that which is a sufficient qualification for admission to one duty, is not so for all. And therefore the position is not true, which is the foundation whereon the whole weight of this argument rests. To say, that although it be true there ought to be a distinction made, in admission to duties of worship, with regard to some qualifications, yet sanctifying grace is not one of those qualifications that make the difference; would be but giving up the argument, and a perfect begging the question.

It is said, there can be _no reason _assigned, why unsanctified persons may attend _other _duties of worship, and not the _Lord’s supper. _But I humbly conceive this must be an inadvertence. For there is a reason very obvious from that necessary and very notable _distinction _among duties of worship, which follows:

1. There are _some duties _of worship, that imply a _profession of God’s covenant_; whose very nature and design is an exhibition of those vital active principles and inward exercises, wherein consists the _condition of the covenant of grace,_ or that union of soul to God, which is the union between Christ and his spouse, entered into by an inward hearty consenting to that covenant. Such are the christian _sacraments, _whose very design is to make and confirm a _profession _of compliance with that covenant, and whose very nature is to exhibit or express the uniting acts of the soul: those sacramental duties therefore cannot be attended by any whose hearts do not really consent to that covenant, and whose souls do not truly close with Christ, without either their being self-deceived, or else wilfully making a false profession, and lying in a very aggravated manner.

2. There are _other duties, _which are _not _in their own nature an exhibition of a _covenant-union _with God, or of any compliance with the condition of the _covenant of grace_; but are the expression of _general virtues, _or virtues in their largest extent, including both special and common. Thus _prayer, _or asking mercy of God, is in its own nature _no _profession of a compliance with the _covenant _of grace. It is an expression of some belief of the being of a God, some sense of our wants, and of a need of God’s help, some sense of our dependence, &c. but not merely such a sense of these things as is spiritual and saving. Indeed there are some prayers proper to be made by _saints, _and many things proper to be expressed by them in prayer, which imply the profession of a spiritual union of heart to God through Christ; but such as no heathen, no heretic, nor natural man whatever, can or ought to make. Prayer in general, and asking mercy and help from God, is no more a profession of consent to the _covenant _of grace, than reading the Scriptures, or meditation, or performing any duty of morality and natural religion. A Mahometan may as well ask mercy, as hear instruction: and any natural man may as well express his desires to God, as hear when God declares his will to him. It is true, when an unconverted man prays, the _manner _of his doing it is sinful: but when a natural man, knowing himself to be so, comes to the Lord’s supper, the very _matter _of what he does, in respect of the profession he there makes, and his pretension to lay hold of God’s covenant, is a _lie, _and a lie told in the most solemn manner.

In a word, the venerable Mr. Stoddard himself, in his _Doctrine of Instituted Churches, _has taught us to distinguish between _instituted _and _natural _acts of religion: the _word _and prayer he places under the head of moral duty, and considers as _common _to all; but the _sacraments, _according to what he says there, being _instituted, _are of _special _administration, and must be _limited _agreeable to the institution.

##### OBJECT. XII.

The Lord’s supper has a proper _tendency _to promote men’s _conversion, _being an affecting representation of the greatest and most important things of God’s word: it has a proper _tendency _to awaken and humble sinners; here being a discovery of the terrible anger of God for sin, by the infliction of the curse upon Christ, when sin was imputed to him; and the representation here made of the dying love of Christ has a _tendency _to draw the hearts of sinners from sin to God, &c.

Answ. Unless it be an evident truth, that _what the Lord’s supper may have tendency to promote, the same it was appointed to promote, _nothing follows from this argument. If the argument affords any consequence, the consequence is built on the _tendency _of the Lord’s supper. And if the consequence be good and strong on this foundation, as drawn from such premises, then wherever the _premises hold, _the _consequence _holds; otherwise it must appear, that the _premises _and _consequence _are not connected. And now let us see how it is _in fact. _Do not _scandalous _persons need to have these very effects wrought in their hearts which have been mentioned? Yes, surely; they need them in a special manner: they need to be awakened; they need to have an affecting discovery of that terrible wrath of God against sin, which was manifested in a peculiar manner by the terrible effects of God’s wrath in the sufferings of his own incarnate Son. Gross sinners need this in some respect more than others. They need to have their hearts broken by an affecting view of the great and important things of God’s word. They need especially to fly to Christ for refuge, and therefore need to have their hearts drawn. And seeing the _Lord’s supper _has so great a _tendency _to promote these things, if the consequence from the _tendency _of the Lord’s supper, as inferring the end of its _appointment, _be good, then it must be a consequence also well inferred, that the Lord’s supper was appointed for the reclaiming and bringing to repentance _scandalous _persons.

To turn this off, by saying, _Scandalous persons are expressly forbid, _is but giving up the argument, and begging the question. It is giving up the argument; since it allows the _consequence _not to be good. For it allows, that notwithstanding the proper _tendency _of the Lord’s supper to promote a design, yet it may be the Lord’s supper was not appointed with a view to promote that end.—And it is a begging the question; since it supposes, that _unconverted men are not evidently forbidden, _as well as scandalous persons; which is the thing in controversy. If they be _evidently _forbid, that is as much to reasonable creatures (who need nothing but good evidence) as if they were _expressly _forbidden.—To say here, that the _Lord’s supper is a converting ordinance only to orderly members, _and that _there is another ordinance appointed for bringing scandalous persons to repentance, _this is no solution of the difficulty; but is only another instance of yielding up the argument, and begging the question. For it plainly concedes, that the _tendency _of an ordinance does not prove it _appointed _to all the ends, which it seems to have a tendency to promote; and also supposes, that there is not any _other _ordinance, appointed for converting sinners that are moral and orderly in their lives, _exclusive of this, _which is the thing in question.

It is at best but very precarious arguing from the seeming _tendency _of things, to the _divine appointment, _or God’s will and disposition with respect to the _use _of those things. Would it not have had a great _tendency _to convince the scribes and Pharisees, and to promote their conversion, if they had been admitted into the mount when Christ was _transfigured_? But yet it was not the will of Christ, that they should be admitted there, or any other but Peter, James, and John. Would it not have had a very great _tendency _to convince and bring to repentance the unbelieving Jews, if they had been allowed to see and converse freely with Christ after his _resurrection, _and see him _ascend _into heaven? But yet it was the will of God, that none but _disciples _should be admitted to these privileges. Might it not have had a good _tendency, _if _all _that were sincere followers of Christ, women as well as men, had been allowed to be _present _at the institution of the _Lord’s supper_? But yet it is commonly thought, none were admitted beside the _apostles._

Indeed the ever honoured author of the _Appeal to the Learned _has supplied me with the true and proper answer to this objection, in the following words, p. 27, 28. “The efficacy of the Lord’s supper does depend upon the blessing of God. _Whatever_ tendency _ordinances have in their_ own nature _to be serviceable _to men, yet they will not prevail any further than God doth bless them. “The weapons of our warfare are mighty through God,” 2 Cor. x. 4. It is God that teaches men to profit, and makes them profitable and serviceable to men’s souls. There is reason to hope for a divine blessing on the _Lord’s supper, _when it is administered to those that it _ought _to be administered to; God’s _blessing _is to be expected in God’s _way. _If men act according to their own humours and fancies, and do not keep in the way of _obedience, _it is presumption to expect God’s blessing, Matt. xv. 9. “In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.” But when _they _are admitted to the Lord’s supper that _God would have to be _admitted, there is ground to hope that he will make it profitable.

##### OBJECT. XIII.

All that are members of the _visible church _and in the _external covenant, _and neither ignorant nor scandalous, are commanded to perform all _external covenant duties_; and particularly they are commanded to attend the _Lord’s supper, _in those words of Christ, _This do in remembrance of me._

Answ. This argument is of no force, without first taking for granted the very thing in question. For this is plainly supposed in it, that however these commands are given to such as are in the _external covenant, _yet they are given _indefinitely, _but with exceptions and reserves, and do not immediately reach _all _such; they do not reach those who are _unqualified, _though they be in the _external covenant. _Now the question is, _Who _are these that are _unqualified_? The objection supposes, that only _ignorant _and _scandalous _persons are so. But _why _are they only supposed unqualified; and not _unconverted _persons too? _Because _it is taken for granted, that these are _not _unqualified. And thus the grand point in question is supposed, instead of being proved. Why are these limitations only singled out, _neither ignorant nor scandalous_; and not others as well? The answer must be, because these are _all _the limitations which the Scripture makes: but this now is the very thing in question. Whereas, the business of an argument is to _prove, _and not to suppose, or to take for granted, the very thing which is to be proved.

If it be here said, It is with good reason that those who are _ignorant _or _scandalous _alone are supposed to be excepted in God’s command, and obligations of the _covenant_; for the covenant spoken of in the objection, is the _external covenant, _and this requires only _external duties_; which alone are what lie within the reach of man’s _natural power, _and so in the reach of his _legal power_: God does not command or require what men have no natural power to perform, and which cannot be performed before something else, some antecedent duty, is performed, which antecedent duty is not in their natural power.

I reply, Still things are but _supposed, _which should be proved, and which want confirmation.

(1.) It is _supposed, _that those who have _externally (i. e. _by oral profession and promise) entered into God’s covenant, are thereby obliged to no more than the external duties of that covenant: which is not proved, and I humbly conceive, is certainly not the true state of the case. They who have _externally _entered into God’s covenant, are by external profession and engagements entered into that one only _covenant of grace, _which the Scripture informs us of; and therefore are obliged to fulfil the duties of _that _covenant, which are chiefly _internal. _The children of Israel, when they _externally _entered into covenant with God at mount Sinai, promised to perform all the duties of the covenant, to obey all the _ten commandments _spoken by God in their hearing, and written in tables of stone, which were therefore called _The Tables of the Covenant_; the sum of which ten commands was, _to love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul, and to love their neighbour as themselves_; which principally at least are _internal _duties. In particular, they promised _not to covet_; which is an _internal _duty.—They promised to _have no other god before the Lord_; which implied, that they would in their hearts regard no other being or object whatever above God, or in equality with him, but would give him their supreme respect.

(2.) It is _supposed, _that God does not _require impossibilities _of men, in this sense, that he does not require those things of them which are out of their _natural _power, and particularly that he does not require them to be _converted. _But this is not proved; nor can I reconcile it with the tenor of the scripture revelation. And the chief advocates for the doctrine I oppose, have themselves abundantly asserted the contrary. The venerable author fore-mentioned, as every body knows, that knew him, always taught, that God justly requires men to be _converted, _to repent of their sins, and turn to the Lord, to close with Christ, and savingly to believe in him; and that in refusing to accept of Christ and turn to God, they disobeyed the divine _commands, _and were guilty of the most heinous sin; and that their moral _inability _was no excuse.

(3.) It is _supposed, _that God does not command men to do those things which are not to be done till _something else _is done, that is not within the reach of men’s _natural ability. _This also is not proved; nor do I see how it can be true, even according to the principles of those who insist on this objection. The fore-mentioned memorable divine ever taught, that God commandeth natural men without delay to _believe _in Christ: and yet he always held, that it was impossible for them to believe till they had by a _preceding _act submitted to the _sovereignty _of God; and yet he held, that men never could do this of _themselves, _till humbled and bowed by powerful convictions of God’s Spirit. Again, he taught, that God commandeth natural men to _love _him with all their heart: and yet he held, that this could not be till men had first _believed _in Christ; the exercise of love being a fruit of faith; and believing in Christ, he supposed not to be within the reach of man’s _natural _ability. Further, he held, that God requireth of all men holy, spiritual, and acceptable _obedience_; and yet that such obedience is not within the reach of their _natural ability_; and not only so, but that there must first be _love _to God, before there could be new obedience, and that this love to God is not within the reach of men’s _natural ability. _Yet, before this love there must be _faith, _which faith is not within the reach of man’s _natural _power; and still, before faith there must be the _knowledge _of God, which knowledge is not in _natural _men’s reach: and, once more, even before the knowledge of God there must be a thorough _humiliation, _which humiliation men could not work in themselves by any natural power of their own. Now, must it needs be thought, notwithstanding all these _unreasonable _things, that God should _command _those whom he has nourished and brought up, to honour him by giving an open testimony of _love _to him; only because wicked men cannot _testify _love till they _have _love, and love is not in their _natural power_? And is it any good _excuse _in the sight of God, for one who is under the highest obligations to him, and yet refuses him suitable honour by openly _testifying _his love of him, to plead that he has no love to testify; but on the contrary, has an infinitely unreasonable hatred? God may most reasonably require a proper testimony and profession of love to him; and yet it may also be reasonable to suppose, at the same time, he forbids men to lie; or to declare that they have love, when they have none: because, though it be supposed, that God requires men to testify love to him, yet he requires them to do it in a right way, and in the true order, _viz. _first _loving _him, and then _testifying _their love.

(4.) I do not see how it can be true, that a natural man has not a _legal _power to be converted, accept of Christ, love God, &c. By a _legal power _to do a thing, is plainly meant such power as brings a person properly within the reach of a _legal obligation, _or the obligation of a law or command to do that thing. But he that has such natural faculties, as render him a proper subject of moral government, may properly be _commanded, _and put under the obligation of a _law _to do things so reasonable; notwithstanding any native aversion and moral inability in him to do his duty, arising from the power of sin. This also, I must observe, was a known doctrine of Mr. Stoddard’s, and what he ever taught.

##### OBJECT. XIV.

Either _unsanctified _persons may lawfully come to the Lord’s supper, or it is unlawful for them to _carry themselves as saints_; but it is not unlawful for them to carry themselves as saints.

Answ. It is the duty of unconverted men both to _become _saints, and to behave as saints. The scripture rule is, Matthew xii. 33 ._ Make the tree good, that the fruit may be good_. Mr. Stoddard himself never supposed, that the fruit of _saints _was to be expected from men, or could possibly be brought forth by them in truth, till they _were _saints.

And I see not how it is true, that unconverted men ought, in _every _respect, to do those _external _things, which it is the duty of a godly man to do. It is the duty of a godly man, conscious of his having given his heart unto the Lord, to profess his love to God and his esteem of him above all, his unfeigned faith in Christ, &c. and in his closet-devotions to thank God for these graces as the fruit of the Spirit in him. But it is not the duty of another that really has no faith, nor love to God, to do thus. Neither any more is it a natural man’s duty to profess these things in the _Lord’s supper._—Mr. Stoddard taught it to be the duty of converts, on many occasions, to profess their faith and love and other graces _before men, _by relating their _experiences _in conversation: but it would be great wickedness, for such as know themselves to be not _saints, _thus to do; because they would speak falsely, and utter lies in so doing. Now, for the like reason, it would be very sinful, for men to profess and seal their _consent _to the covenant of grace in the _Lord’s supper, _when they know at the same time that they do _not _consent to it, nor have their _hearts _at all in the affair.

##### OBJECT. XV.

This scheme will keep out of the church some true saints; for there are some such who determine against themselves, and their prevailing judgment is, that they are not saints: and we had better let in several hypocrites, than exclude one true child of God.

Answ. I think, it is much better to insist on some _visibility _to reason, of _true saintship, _in admitting members, even although this, through men’s infirmity and darkness, and Satan’s temptations, be an occasion of some true saints abstaining; than by express liberty given, to open the door to as many as please, of those who have _no visibility _of real saintship, and make no profession of it, nor pretension to it; and that because this method tends to the ruin and great reproach of the christian church, and also to the ruin of the persons admitted.

1. It tends to the _reproach_ and _ruin_ of the christian _church_. For _by the rule which God hath given for admissions, if it be carefully attended, _(it is said,) more _unconverted than converted persons, will be admitted._ It is then _confessedly_ the way to have the greater part of the members of the christian church _ungodly_ men; yea, so much greater, that the godly shall be but _few_ in comparison of the ungodly; agreeable to their interpretation of that saying of Christ, _many are called, but few are chosen._ Now, if this be an exact state of the case, it will demonstrably follow, on scripture principles, that opening the door so wide has a direct tendency to bring into christian churches such as are without even _moral sincerity,_ and do not make religion at all their business, neglecting and casting off secret prayer and other duties, and living a life of carnality and vanity, so far as they can, consistently with avoiding _church-censures_; which possibly may be sometimes to a great degree. Ungodly men may be morally sober, serious, and conscientious, and may have what is called _moral sincerity, _for a while; and even may have these things in a considerable measure, when they first come into the church: but if their hearts are not changed, there is no probability at all of these things continuing long. The Scripture has told us, that this _their goodness _is apt to vanish _like the morning cloud and early dew. _How can it be expected but that their religion should in a little time _wither away, _when it has _no root_? How can it be expected, that the _lamp _should burn long, without _oil in the vessel _to feed it? If _lust _be unmortified, and left in reigning power in the heart, it will sooner or later prevail; and at length sweep away _common grace _and _moral sincerity, _however excited and maintained for a while by conviction and temporary affections. It will happen to them according to the _true proverb, The dog is returned to his vomit_;_ and the swine that was washed, to his wallowing in the mire. _It is said of the hypocrite, _Will he delight himself in the Almighty_?_ Will he always call upon God_?—And thus our churches will be likely to be such congregations as the psalmist said he _hated, _and _would not sit with. _Psal. xxvi. 4, 5. “I have not sat with vain persons, nor will I go in with dissemblers; I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, nor will I sit with the wicked.”—This will be the way to have the Lord’s table ordinarily furnished with such guests as allow themselves to live in known sin, meeting together only to crucify Christ afresh, instead of commemorating his crucifixion with the repentance, faith, gratitude, and love of friends. And this is the way to have the governing part of the church such as are not even conscientious men, and are careless about the honour and interest of religion. And the direct tendency of that is, in process of time, to introduce a prevailing negligence in discipline, and carelessness in seeking ministers of a pious and worthy character. And the next step will be, the church being filled with persons openly vicious in manners, or else scandalously erroneous in opinions. It is well if this be not already the case in fact with some churches that have long professed and practised on the principles I oppose. And if these principles should be professed and proceeded on by christian churches every where, the natural tendency of it would be, to have the greater part of what is called the church of Christ, through the world, made up of vicious and erroneous persons. And how greatly would this be to the reproach of the christian church, and of the holy name and religion of Jesus Christ in the sight of all nations! And this by the way answers another objection, which some have made, viz. That the way I plead for, tends to keep the church of Christ small, and hinder the growth of it. Whereas, I think, the contrary tends to keep it small, as it is the wickedness of its members, that above all things in the world prejudices mankind against it; and is the chief stumbling-block, that hinders the propagation of Christianity, and so the growth of the christian church. But holiness would cause the light of the church to shine so as to induce others to resort to it.

And now is it not better, to have a few real living Christians kept back through darkness and scruples, than to open a door for letting in such universal ruin as this? To illustrate it by a familiar comparison; Is it not better, when England is at war with France, to keep out of the British realm a few loyal Englishmen, than to give leave for as many treacherous Frenchmen to come in as please?

2. This way tends to the eternal ruin of the _parties admitted_; for it lets in such, yea, it persuades such to come in, as _know themselves to be impenitent and unbelieving, _in a dreadful manner to _take God’s name in vain_;_ in vain to worship him, _and abuse sacred things, by performing those external acts and rites in the name of God, which are instituted for declarative signs and professions of repentance toward God, faith in Christ, and love to him, at the same time that _they know _themselves destitute of those things which they profess to have. And is it not better, that some _true saints, _through their own weakness and misunderstanding, should be kept away from the Lord’s table, which will not keep such out of heaven, than voluntarily to bring in multitudes of _false professors _to partake unworthily, and in effect to seal their own condemnation.

##### OBJECT. XVI.

You _cannot keep out hypocrites,_ when all is said and done; but _as many _graceless persons will be likely to get into the church in the way of a _profession of godliness, _as if nothing were insisted on, but a freedom from public _scandal._

Answ. It may possibly be so in some places through the misconduct of ministers and people, by remissness in their inquiries, carelessness as to the proper matter of a profession, or setting up some mistaken rules of judgment; neglecting those things which the Scripture insists upon as the most essential articles in the character of a _real saint_; and substituting others in the room of them; such as impressions on the imagination, instead of renewing influences on the heart; pangs of affection, instead of the habitual temper of the mind; a certain method and order of impressions and suggestions, instead of the nature of things experienced, &c. But to say, that in churches where the nature, the notes, and evidences of _true Christianity, _as described in the Scriptures, are well understood, taught, and observed, _there _as many _hypocrites _are likely to get in; or to suppose, that _there _as many persons of an honest character, who are well instructed in these rules, and well conducted by them—and judging of themselves by these rules, do think themselves true saints, and accordingly make profession of godliness, and are admitted as saints in a judgment of rational charity—are likely to be carnal, unconverted men, as of those who make no such pretence and have no such hope, nor exhibit any such evidences to the eye of a judicious charity, is not so much an objection against the doctrine I am defending, as a reflection upon the Scripture itself, with regard to the rules it gives, either for persons to judge of their own state, or for others to form a charitable judgment, as if they were of little or no service. We are in miserable circumstances indeed, if the rules of God’s holy word in things of such infinite importance, are so ambiguous and uncertain, like the heathen oracles. And it would be very strange, if in these days of the gospel, when God’s mind is revealed with such great plainness of speech, and the canon of Scripture is completed, it should ordinarily be the case in fact, that those who, having a right doctrinal understanding of the Scripture, and judging themselves by its rules, do probably conclude or seriously hope of themselves, that they are real saints, are _as many _of them in a state of sin and condemnation, as others who have no such rational hope concerning their good estate, nor pretend to any special experiences in religion.

##### OBJECT. XVII.

IF a _profession of godliness _be a thing required in order to admission into the church, there being some _free saints _who _doubt _of their state, and from a _tender conscience _will not dare to make such a profession; and there being _others, _that have no grace, nor much tenderness of conscience, but great _presumption _and _forwardness, _who will boldly make the highest profession of religion, and so will get admittance: it will hence come to pass, that the very thing, which will in effect procure for the _latter _an admission, rather than the former, will be their _presumption _and _wickedness._

Answ. 1. It is no sufficient objection against the _wholesomeness _of a rule established for regulating the _civil _state of mankind, that in _some _instances men’s _wickedness _may take _advantage _by that _rule, _so that even their _wickedness _shall be the very thing, which, by an abuse of that rule, procures them temporal _honours _and _privileges. _For such is the present state of man in this evil world, that good rules, in many instances, are liable to be thus abused and perverted. As for instance, there are many human laws, accounted wholesome and necessary, by which an accused or suspected person’s own solemn profession of _innocency, _upon _oath, _shall be the condition of acquittance and impunity; and the want of such a protestation or profession shall expose him to the punishment. And yet, by an abuse of these rules, in some instances, nothing but the horrid sin of _perjury, _or that most presumptuous wickedness of false swearing, shall be the very thing that acquits a man: while another of a more tender conscience, who _fears an oath, _must suffer the penalty of the law.

2. Those rules, by all wise lawgivers, are accounted wholesome, which prove of _general _good tendency, notwithstanding any bad consequences arising in some particular instances. And as to the ecclesiastical rule now in question, of admission to sacraments on a _profession of godliness, _when attended with requisite circumstances; although in particular instances it may be an occasion of some _tender-hearted _Christians _abstaining, _and some _presumptuous _sinners being _admitted, _yet that does not hinder but that a proper _visibility _of holiness to the eye of reason, or a _probability _of it in a judgment of rational christian charity, may this way be maintained, as the proper qualification of candidates for admission. Nor does it hinder but that it may be reasonable and wholesome for mankind, in their outward conduct, to regulate themselves by such probability; and that this should be a reasonable and good rule for the church to regulate themselves by in their admissions; notwithstanding it may happen in particular instances, that things are _really _diverse from, yea the very reverse of, what they are _visibly. _Such a _profession _as has been insisted on, when attended with _requisite circumstances, _carries in it a rational credibility in the judgment of christian charity: for it ought to be attended with an honest and sober character, and with evidences of good doctrinal knowledge, and with all proper, careful, and diligent instructions of a prudent pastor. And though the pastor is not to act as a _searcher of the heart, _or a _lord of conscience _in this affair, yet that hinders not but that he may and ought to inquire particularly into the experiences of the souls committed to his care and charge, that he may be under the best advantages to instruct and advise them, to apply the teachings and rules of God’s word unto them, for their self-examination, to be _helpers of their joy, _and promoters of their salvation. However, finally, not any pretended extraordinary skill of _his _in discerning the heart, but the person’s _own _serious profession concerning what he finds in his own soul, after he has been well instructed, must regulate the public conduct with respect to him, where there is no other external visible thing to contradict and overrule it. And a serious profession of godliness, under these circumstances, carries in it a visibility to the eye of the church’s rational and christian judgment.

3. If it be still insisted on, that a _rule _of admission into the church cannot be _good, _if liable to such _abuse _as that forementioned, I must observe, This will overthrow the rules that the _objectors _themselves go by in their admissions. For they insist upon it, that a man must not only have knowledge and be free of scandal, but must appear _orthodox _and profess the common faith. Now _presumptuous lying, _for the sake of the honour of being in the church, having children baptized, and voting in ecclesiastical affairs, may possibly be the very thing that brings some men into the church by this rule; while greater _tenderness of conscience _may be the very thing that keeps others out. For instance, a man who secretly in his mind gives no credit to the commonly received doctrine of the _Trinity, _yet may, by pretending an assent to it, and in hypocrisy making a public profession of it, get into the church; when at the same time another that equally disbelieves it, but has a more tender conscience than to allow himself in solemnly telling a lie, may by that very means be kept off from the communion.

##### OBJECT. XVIII.

It seems hardly reasonable to suppose, that the only wise God has made men’s _opinion of themselves, _and a _profession_ of it, the term of their admission to church-privileges; when we know, that very often the _worst _men have the _highest _opinion of themselves.

Answ. 1. It must be granted me, that in fact this is the case, if any proper _profession _at all is expected and required, whether it be of _sanctifying grace, _or of _moral sincerity, _or any thing else that is _good_: and to be sure, nothing is _required _to be professed, or is _worthy _to be professed, any further than it is _good._

Answ. 2. If _some _things, by the confession of all, must be _professed, because _they are _good,_ and of great importance; then certainly it must be very unreasonable, to say, that those things wherein true _holiness _consists are _not _to be professed, or that a profession of them should _not _be required, because they are _good, _even in the highest degree, and infinitely the most important and most necessary things of any in the world. And it is unreasonable to say, that it is the less to be expected we should profess sincere friendship to Christ, _because _friendship to Christ is the most _excellent _qualification of any whatsoever, and the contrary the most odious. How absurd is it to say this, merely under a notion that for a man to _profess _what is so good and so reasonable, is to profess a _high opinion of himself_!

Answ. 3. Though some of the _worst _men are apt to entertain the _highest opinion of themselves, _yet their self-conceit is no _rule _to the church; but the apparent _credibility _of men’s _profession _is to be the ground of ecclesiastical proceedings.

##### OBJECT. XIX.

If it be necessary that _adult _persons should make a profession of godliness, in order to their own admission to _baptism, _then undoubtedly it is necessary in order to their _children _being baptized on their account. For parents cannot convey to their children a right to this sacrament by virtue of any qualifications _lower _than those requisite in order to their own right: children being admitted to baptism only as being, as it were, parts and members of their parents. And besides, the act of parents in offering up their _children _in a sacrament, which is a seal of the _covenant of grace, _is in them a solemn attending that sacrament _as _persons _interested _in the covenant, and a public manifestation of their approving and consenting to it, as truly as if they then offered up _themselves _to God in that ordinance. Indeed it implies a renewed offering up themselves with their children, and devoting both jointly to God in covenant; _themselves, _with their children, as _parts of themselves. _But now what fearful work will such doctrine make amongst us! We shall have multitudes _unbaptized, _who will be without the external badge of Christianity, and so in that respect will be like heathens. And this is the way to have the land full of persons who are destitute of that which is spoken of in Scripture as ordinarily requisite to men’s _salvation_; and it will bring a _reproach _on vast multitudes, with the families they belong to. And not only so, but it will tend to make them profane and heathenish; for by thus treating our children, as though “they had no part in the Lord, we shall cause them to cease from fearing the Lord;” Josh. xxii. 24, 25.

Answ. 1. As to children being _destitute _of that which is spoken of in Scripture as one thing ordinarily _requisite to salvation_; I would observe, that _baptism _can do their souls no good any otherwise than through God’s _blessing _attending it: but we have no reason to expect his blessing with baptism, if administered to those that it does _not _belong to by _his institution._

Answ. 2. As to the _reproach, _which will be brought on parents and children, by children going without baptism, through the parents neglecting a profession of godliness, and so visibly remaining among the unconverted; if any insist on this objection, I think it will savour of much _unreasonableness _and even _stupidity._

It will savour of an _unreasonable _spirit. Is it not enough, if God freely offers men to own their children and to give them the honour of baptism, in case the parents will turn from sin and relinquish their enmity against him, heartily give up themselves and their children to him, and take upon them the profession of godliness?—If men are truly _excusable, _in not turning to God through Christ, in not believing with the heart, and in not confessing with the mouth, why do not we openly plead that they are so? And why do we not teach sinners, that they are _not to blame _for continuing among the enemies of Christ, and neglecting and despising his great salvation? If they are not at all excusable in this, and it be wholly owing to their own indulged lusts, that they refuse sincerely to give up themselves and their children to God, then how unreasonable is it for them to complain that their children are denied the honour of having God’s mark set upon them as some of his? If parents are angry at this, such a temper shows them to be very insensible of their own vile treatment of the blessed God. Suppose a prince send to a traitor in prison, and upon opening the prison doors make him the offer, that if he would come forth and submit himself to him, he should not only be pardoned himself, but both he and his children should have such and such badges of honour conferred upon them; and yet the rebel’s enmity and stoutness of spirit against his prince is such, that he cannot find in his heart to comply with the gracious offer, will he have any cause to be angry, that his children have not those badges of honour given them? Besides, it is very much owing to _parents, _that there are so many _young _people who can make no profession of godliness. They have themselves therefore to blame, if proceeding on the principles which have been maintained, there is like to rise a generation of unbaptized persons. If ancestors had thoroughly done their duty to their posterity in instructing, praying for, and governing their children, and setting them good examples, there is reason to think, the case would have been far otherwise.

Insisting on this objection would savour of much _stupidity. _For the objection seems to suppose the country to be full of those that are _unconverted, _and so exposed every moment to eternal damnation; yet it seems we do not hear such great and general complaints and lamentable outcries concerning this. Now why is it looked upon so dreadful, to have great numbers going without the _name _and honourable _badge _of Christianity, when at the same time it is no more resented and laid to heart, that such multitudes go without the _thing, _which is infinitely more dreadful? Why are we so silent about this? What is the _name _good for, without the _thing_? Can parents bear to have their children go about the world in the most odious and dangerous state of soul, in reality the children of the devil, and condemned to eternal burnings; when at the same time they cannot bear to have them disgraced by going without the honour of being _baptized_? A high honour and privilege this is; yet how can parents be contented with the _sign, _exclusive of the _thing _signified? Why should they covet the external honour for their children, while they are so careless about the spiritual blessing? Does not this argue a senselessness of their own misery, as well as of their children’s, in being in a _Christless _state? If a man and his child were both together bitten by a viper, dreadfully swollen, and like to die, would it not argue _stupidity _in the parent, to be anxiously concerned only about his child’s having on a dirty garment in such circumstances, and angry at others for not putting some outward ornament upon it? But the difference in this present case is infinitely greater, and more important. Let parents pity their poor children because they are without baptism; and pity themselves who are in danger of everlasting misery, while they have no interest in the covenant of grace, and so have no right to covenant favours and honours, for themselves nor children. No religious honours, to be obtained in any other way than by real religion, are much worth contending for. And in truth, it is no honour at all to a man, to have merely the outward _badges _of a Christian, without _being _a Christian indeed; any more than it would be an honour to a man that has no learning, but is a mere dunce, to have a degree at college; or than it is for a man who has no valour, but is a grand coward, to have an honourable commission in an army; which only serves, by lifting him up, to expose him to deeper reproach, and sets him forth as the more notable object of contempt.

Answ. 3. Concerning the _tendency _of this way of confining baptism to professors of godliness and their children, to promote _irreligion _and _profaneness_; I would observe, _first,_ That _Christ _is best able to _judge _of the tendency of his own _institutions. Secondly, _I am bold to say, that supposing this principle and practice to have such a tendency, is a great _mistake, _contrary to Scripture and plain reason and experience. Indeed such a tendency it would have, to shut men out from _having any part in the Lord, _(in the sense of the two tribes and half, Josh. xxii. 25..) or to fence them out by such a partition-wall as formerly was between Jews and Gentiles; and so to shut them out as to tell them, if they were never so much disposed to serve God, he was not ready to accept them; according to the notion the Jews seem to have had of the uncircumcised Gentiles.—But to forbear giving men honours to which they have no title, and not to compliment them with the name and badge of God’s people and children, while they pretend to nothing but what is consistent with their being his enemies, this has no such tendency. But the contrary has very much this tendency. For is it not found by constant experience through all ages, that blind, corrupt mankind, in matters of religion, are strongly disposed to rest in a _name _instead of the _thing_; in the shadow, instead of the substance; and to make themselves easy with the former, in the neglect of the latter? This over-valuing of common grace, and _moral sincerity, _as it is called; this building so much upon them, making them the conditions of enjoying the seals of God’s covenant, and the appointed privileges, and honourable and sacred badges, of God’s children; this, I cannot but think, naturally tends to sooth and flatter the pride of vain man, while it tends to aggrandize those things in men’s eyes, which they of themselves are strongly disposed to magnify and trust in, without such encouragements to prompt them to it, yea, against all discouragements and dissuasives that can possibly be used with them.

This way of proceeding greatly tends to establish the negligence of _parents, _and to confirm the stupidity and security of wicked _children._—If _baptism _were _denied _to all children, whose parents did not _profess godliness, _and in a judgment of rational charity appear _real saints, _it would tend to excite pious heads of families to more thorough care and pains in the religious education of their children, and to more fervent prayer for them, that they might be converted in _youth, _before they enter into a married state; and so if they have children, the entail of the covenant be secured.—And it would tend to awaken _young _people themselves, as yet unconverted, especially when about to settle in the world. Their having no right to christian privileges for their children, in case they should become parents, would tend to lead them at such a time seriously to reflect on their own awful state; which, if they do not get out of it, must lay a foundation for so much calamity and reproach to their families. And if after their becoming _parents, _they still remain unconverted, the melancholy thought of their children going without so much as the external mark of Christians, would have a continual tendency to affect them with their own sin and folly in neglecting to turn to God, by which they bring such visible calamity and disgrace on themselves and families. They would have this additional motive continually to stir them up to seek grace for themselves and their children. Whereas, the contrary practice has a natural tendency to quiet the minds of persons, both in their own and their children’s unregeneracy. Yea, may it not be suspected, that the way of baptizing the children of such as never make any proper profession of godliness, is an expedient originally invented for that very end, to give ease to ancestors with respect to their posterity, in times of general declension and degeneracy?

This way of proceeding greatly tends to establish the stupidity and irreligion of _children, _as well as the negligence of parents. It is certain, that unconverted parents do never truly give up their children to God; since they do not truly give up themselves to him. And if neither of the parents appear truly pious, in the judgment of rational charity, there is not in this case any ground to expect that the children will be _brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, _or that they will have any thing worthy the name of a christian education, how solemnly soever the parents may promise it. The faithfulness of Abraham was such as might be trusted in this matter. See Gen. xviii. 19.. But men that are not so much as visibly godly, upon what grounds are they to be trusted? How can it be reasonably expected, that they should faithfully bring up their children for god, who were never sincerely willing that their children or themselves should be his? And it will be but presumption, to expect that those children who are never given up to God, nor brought up for him, should prove religious, and be God’s children. There is no manner of reason to expect any other than that such children ordinarily will grow up in irreligion, whether they are baptized or not. And for persons to go about with the name and visible seal of God, and the sacred badge of Christianity upon them, having had their bodies, by a holy ordinance, consecrated to God as his temples, yet living in irreligion and ways of wickedness; this serves to tend exceedingly to harden them, and establish in them an habitual contempt of sacred things. Such persons, above all men, are like to be the most hardened and abandoned, and reclaimed with most difficulty: as it was with the wicked Jews, who were much more confirmed in their wickedness, than those heathen cities of Tyre and Sidon. To give that which is holy to those who are profane, or whom we have no reason, from the circumstances of parentage and education, to expect will be otherwise, is not the way to make them better, but worse. It is the way to have them habitually _trample _holy things _under their feet,_ and increase in contempt of them, yea, even to _turn again and rend us, _and be more mischievous and hurtful enemies of that which is good, than otherwise they would be.

_ministers _have been greatly _blessed _in the other way of proceeding, and some men have been _converted at the Lord’s supper._

Answ. Though we are to eye the providence of God, and not disregard his _works, _yet to interpret them to a sense, or to apply them to an use, inconsistent with the scope of the _word _of God, is a misconstruction and misapplication of them. God has not given us his _providence, _but his _word, _to be our governing _rule. _God is sovereign in his dispensations of providence; he bestowed the blessing on Jacob, even when he had a lie in his mouth. He was pleased to meet with Solomon, and make known himself to him, and bless him in an extraordinary manner, while he was worshipping in a _high place. _He met with Saul, when in a course of violent opposition to him, and out of the way of his duty in the highest degree, going to Damascus to persecute Christ; and even then bestowed the greatest blessing upon him, that perhaps ever was bestowed on a mere man. The conduct of Divine Providence, with its reasons, is too little understood by us, to be improved as our rule. “God has his way in the sea, his path in the mighty waters, and his footsteps are not known: and he gives none account of any of his matters.” But God has given us his _word, _to this very end, that it might be our _rule_; and therefore has so ordered it that it may be understood by us. And strictly speaking, this is our _only _rule. If we join any thing else to it, as making it our _rule, _we do that which we have no warrant for, yea, that which God himself has forbidden. See Deut. iv. 2.. Prov. xxx. 6.. And with regard to God’s blessing and succeeding ministers, have not some had remarkable experience of it in the way which I plead for, as well as some who have been for the way I oppose? However, we cannot conclude, that God sees nothing at all _amiss _in ministers, because he _blesses _them. In general, he may see those things in them which are very right and excellent; these he approves and regards, while he overlooks and pardons their mistakes in opinion or practice, and, notwithstanding these, is pleased to crown their labours with his blessing.

As to the two last arguments in the _Appeal to the Learned, _concerning the subjects of the christian sacraments, their being members of the _visible church, _and not the _invisible_; the force of those arguments depends entirely on the resolution of this question, Who are _visible saints_? or what adult persons are regularly admitted to the privileges of members of the _visible church_? Which question has already been largely considered; and, I think, it has been demonstrated that they are those who exhibit a credible profession and visibility of _gospel holiness _or vital piety, and not merely of _moral sincerity. _So that there is no need of further debating the point in this place.

I might here mention many things not yet noticed, which some object as _inconveniences _attending the scheme I have maintained. If men should set up their own wit and wisdom in opposition to God’s revealed will, there is no end of objections of this kind, which might be raised against any of God’s institutions. Some have found great fault even with the _creation _of the world, as being very inconveniently done, and have imagined that they could tell how it might be mended in a great many respects. But however God’s altar may appear homely to us, yet if we lift up our hand to mend it, we shall pollute it. Laws and institutions are given for the _general good, _and not to avoid every particular inconvenience. And however it may so happen, that sometimes inconveniences (real or imaginary) may attend the scheme I have maintained; yet, I think, they are in no measure equal to the manifest conveniences and happy tendencies of it, or to the palpable inconveniences and pernicious consequences of the other.—I have already mentioned some things of this aspect, and would here briefly observe some others.

Thus, the way of making such a difference between outward duties of _morality, _and _worship, _and those great inward duties of our _love of God _and _acceptance of Christ, _that the former must be _visible, _but that there need be _no exhibition _nor _pretence _of the latter, in order to persons being admitted into the visible family of God; and that under a notion of the latter being _impossibilities, _but the other being _within men’s power_; this, I think, has a direct tendency to confirm in men an _insensibility _of the heinousness of unbelief and enmity against God our Saviour, which are the source and sum of all wickedness. It tends to prevent their coming under an humbling _conviction _of the greatness and utter inexcusableness of these sins, which men must be brought to if ever they obtain salvation. Indeed it is a way that not only has this tendency, but has actually and apparently this effect, and that to a great degree.

The effect of this method of proceeding in the churches in New England, which have fallen into it, is actually this.—There are some that are received into these churches under the notion of their being in the judgment of rational charity _visible saints _or _professing saints, _who yet at the same time are actually open _professors _of heinous _wickedness_; I mean, the wickedness of living in known impenitence and unbelief, the wickedness of living in enmity against God, and in the rejection of Christ under the gospel. Or, which is the same thing, they are such as freely and frequently acknowledge, that they do not profess to be as yet _born again, _but look on themselves as really _unconverted, _as having never unfeignedly accepted of Christ; and they do either explicitly or implicitly number themselves among those that _love not the Lord Jesus Christ_; of whom the apostle says, let such be _Anathema Maran-atha_! And accordingly it is known, all over the town where they live, that they make no pretensions to any _sanctifying grace _already obtained; nor of consequence are they commonly looked upon as any other than _unconverted _persons. Now, can this be judged the comely _order _of the gospel? or shall God be supposed the _author _of such _confusion_?

In this way of church-proceeding, God’s own children and the true disciples of Christ are obliged to receive those as their _brethren, _admit them to the _communion of saints, _and embrace them in the highest acts of christian society, even in their great _feast of love, _where they feed together on the body and blood of Christ, whom yet they have no reason to look upon otherwise than as _enemies of the cross of _Christ, and haters of their heavenly Father and dear Redeemer. For they make no pretension to any thing at all inconsistent with those characters; yea, in many places, as I said before, freely professing this to be actually the case with them.

Christ often forbids the members of his church to _judge one another. _But in this way of ecclesiastical proceeding, it is done continually, and looked upon as no hurt; a great part of those admitted into the church are by others of the same communion judged _unconverted, graceless _persons; and it is impossible to avoid it, while we stretch not beyond the bounds of a _rational _charity.

This method of proceeding must inevitably have one of these two consequences: either there must be _no public notice _at all given of it, when so signal a work of grace is wrought, as a sinner being brought to repent and turn to God, and hopefully become the subject of saving conversion; or else this notice must be given in the way of _conversation, _by the _persons themselves, _frequently, freely, and in all companies, declaring their own experiences. But surely, either of these consequences must be very unhappy.—The former is so, _viz. _forbidding and preventing any _public _notice being given on earth of the _repentance of a sinner, _an event so much to the honour of God, and so much taken notice of in _heaven, _causing _joy in the presence of the angels of God, _and tending so much to the advancement of religion in the world. For it is found by experience, that scarce any one thing has so great an influence to awaken sinners, and engage them to seek salvation, and to quicken and animate saints, as the tidings of a sinner’s repentance, or hopeful conversion. God evidently makes use of it as an eminent means of advancing religion in a time of remarkable revival. And to take a course effectually to prevent its being notified on earth, appears to me a counteracting of God, in that which he ever makes use of as a chief means of the propagation of true piety, and which we have reason to think he will make use of as one principal means of the conversion of the world in the glorious latter day.—But now as to the _other _way—the way of giving notice to the public of this event, by particular persons _themselves _publishing their own experiences, from time to time and from place to place, on all occasions and before all companies—I must confess, it is a practice that appears to me attended with many inconveniences, yea, big with mischiefs. The abundant trial of this method lately made, and the large experience we have had of the evil consequences of it, is enough to put all sober and judicious people for ever out of conceit with it. I shall not pretend to enumerate all the mischiefs attending it, which would be very tedious; but shall now only mention two things. One is, the bad effect it has upon the persons themselves that practise it, in the great tendency it has to spiritual _pride_; insensibly begetting and establishing an evil habit of mind in that respect, by the frequent return of the temptation, and this many times when they are not guarded against it, and have no time, by consideration and prayer, to fortify their minds. And then it has a very bad effect on the minds of _others _that hear their communication, and so on the state of religion in general, in this way. It being thus the custom for persons of all sorts, young and old, wise and unwise, superiors and inferiors, freely to tell their own experiences before all companies, it is commonly done very _injudiciously, _often very rashly and foolishly, out of season, and in circumstances tending to defeat any good end. Even sincere Christians too frequently in their conversation insist mainly on those things that are no part of their _true spiritual experience_; such as impressions on their imagination, suggestions of facts by passages of Scripture, &c.; in which case _children _and weak persons that hear, are apt to form their notions of religion and true piety by such experimental communications, and much more than they do by the most solid and judicious instructions they hear from the pulpit. This is found to be one of the devices whereby Satan has an inexpressible advantage to ruin the souls of men, and utterly to confound the interest of religion.—This matter of making a public profession of godliness or piety of heart, is certainly a very important affair, and ought to be under some _public regulation, _and under the direction of _skilful guides, _and not left to the management of every man, woman, and child, according to their humour or fancy. And when it is done, it should be done with great seriousness, preparation, and prayer, as a solemn act of public respect and honour to God, in his house and in the presence of his people. Not that I condemn, but greatly approve of, persons speaking sometimes of their religious experiences in private conversation, to proper persons and on proper occasions, with modesty and discretion, when the glory of God and the benefits or just satisfaction of others require it of them.

In a word, the practice of promiscuous admission—or that way of taking all into the _church _indifferently, _as visible _ _saints, _who are not either ignorant or scandalous—and at the same time that custom taking place of persons publishing their own _conversion _in common _conversation_; where these two things meet together, they unavoidably make _two_ distinct kinds of _visible churches, _or different bodies of professing saints, one within another, openly distinguished one from another, as it were by a visible dividing line. One company consisting of those who are _visibly gracious _Christians, and open _professors of godliness_; another consisting of those who are _visibly moral _livers, and only profess common virtues, without pretending to any special and spiritual experiences in their hearts, and who therefore are not reputed to be converts. I may appeal to those acquainted with the state of the churches, whether this be not actually the case in some, where this method of proceeding has been long established. But I leave the judicious reader to make his own remarks on this case, and to determine, whether there be a just foundation in Scripture or reason for any such state of things; which to me, I confess, carries the face of glaring absurdity.

And now I commit this whole discourse (under God’s blessing) to the reader’s candid reflection and impartial judgment. I am sensible, it will be very difficult for many to be truly impartial in this affair; their prejudices being very great against the doctrine which I have maintained. And, I believe, I myself am the person, who, above all other upon the face of the earth, have had most in my circumstances to prejudice me against this doctrine, and to make me unwilling to receive conviction of its truth. However, the clear evidence of God’s mind in his word, as things appear to me, has constrained me to think and act as I have now done. I dare not go contrary to such texts as these, Lev. x. 10.. Jer. xv. 19.. Ezek. xxii. 26; xliv. 6-8.. And having been fully persuaded in my own mind, as to what is the scripture rule in this matter, after a most careful, painful, and long search, I am willing, in the faithful prosecution of what appears to me of such importance and so plainly the mind and will of God, to resign to his providence, and leave the event in his hand.

It may not be improper to add here, as I have often had suggested to me the probability of my being _answered _from the press: If any one shall see cause to undertake this, I have these reasonable requests to make to him, _viz. _That he would avoid the ungenerous and unmanly artifices used by too many polemic writers, while they _turn aside to vain jangling, _in _carping _at incidental passages, and displaying their wit upon some minute particulars, or less material things, in the author they oppose, with much _exclamation, _if possible to excite the ignorant and unwary reader’s disrelish of the author, and to make him appear contemptible, and so to get the victory that way; perhaps dwelling upon, and glorying in, some pretended _inconsistencies _in some parts of the discourse, without ever entering thoroughly into the _merits of the cause, _or closely encountering any of the main arguments. If any one opposes me from the press, I desire he would attend to the true state of the question, and endeavour fairly to take off the force of each argument, by answering the same directly, and distinctly, with calm and close reasoning; avoiding (as much as may be) both dogmatical assertion and passionate reflection. Sure I am, I shall not envy him the applause of a victory over me, however signal and complete, if only gained by superior light and convincing evidence.—I would also request him to set his _name _to his performance, that I may in that respect stand on even ground with him before the world, in a debate wherein the public is to judge between us. This will be the more reasonable, in case he should mingle any thing of accusation with his arguing. It was _the manner _even of the heathen Romans, and reputed by them but just and equal, _to have accusers face to face._

May the God of all grace and peace unite us more in judgment, affection, and practice, that with _one heart, _and _one mouth, _we may glorify his name through _Jesus Christ._ Amen.
