---
publish: true
type: chapter
title: SECTION I. A general introductory statement.
author: "[[Jonathan Edwards]]"
parent: "[[The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Volume One]]"
publisher: "[[CCEL]]"
year: 2002
tags:
  - resources/CCEL
related:
  - "[[Revelación general]]"
---

# SECTION I. A general introductory statement.

##### SECT. I.

_A general introductory statement. _

The people of the country, in general, I suppose, are as sober, orderly, and good sort of people, as in any part of New England; and I believe they have been preserved the freest by far of any part of the country, from _error, _and variety of _sects _and opinions. Our being so far _within _the land, at a distance from sea-ports, and in a corner of the country, has doubtless been _one reason _why we have not been so much corrupted with _vice, _as most other parts. But without question, the _religion _and good order of the county, and purity in _doctrine, _has, under God, been very much owing to the great abilities, and eminent piety, of my venerable and honoured grandfather Stoddard. I suppose we have been the freest of any part of the land from unhappy _divisions _and _quarrels _in our ecclesiastical and religious affairs, till the late lamentable _Springfield contention_. The Springfield Contention relates to the settlement of a minister there, which occasioned too warm debates between some, both pastors and people, that were for it, and others that were against it, on account of their different apprehensions about his principles, and about some steps that were taken to procure his ordination.

Being much separated from other parts of the province, and having comparatively but little intercourse with them, we have always managed our ecclesiastical affairs within ourselves. It is the way in which the country, from its infancy, has gone on, by the practical agreement of all; and the way in which our peace and good order has hitherto been maintained.

The town of Northampton is of about 82 years standing, and has now about 200 families; which mostly dwell more _compactly_ together than any town of such a size in these parts of the country. This probably has been an occasion, that both our _corruptions_ and _reformations_ have been, from time to time, the more _swiftly_ propagated from one to another through the town. Take the town in general, and so far as I can judge, they are as _rational_ and _intelligent_ a people as most I have been acquainted with. Many of them have been noted for religion; and particularly remarkable for their distinct _knowledge_ in things that relate to _heart_ religion, and Christian _experience_, and their great _regards_ thereto.

I am the _third minister_ who has been settled in the town. The Rev. Mr. Eleazer Mather, who was the _first_, was ordained in July, 1669. He was one whose heart was much in his _work_, and abundant in _labours_ for the good of precious souls. He had the high esteem and great love for his people, and was blessed with no small _success_. The Rev. Mr. Stoddard who succeeded him, came first to the town the November after his death; but was not ordained till September 11, 1672, and died February 11, 1728-9. So that he continued in the work of the ministry here, from his first coming to town, near 60 years. And as he was eminent and _renowned_ for his gifts and grace; so he was blessed, from the beginning, with _extraordinary success_ in his ministry, in the conversion of many souls. He had _five harvests_, as he called them. The _first_ was about 57 years ago; the _second_ about 53; the _third_ about 40; the _fourth_ about 24; the _fifth_ and last about 18 years ago. Some of these times were much more remarkable than others, and the ingathering of souls more plentiful. Those about 53, and 40, and 24 years ago, were much greater than either the _first_ or the _last_: but in _each_ of them, I have heard my grandfather say, the greater part of the _young_ people in the town, seemed to be mainly concerned for their eternal salvation.

After the _last_ of these, came a far more degenerate time (at least among the young people), I suppose, than ever before. Mr. Stoddard, indeed, had the comfort, before he died, of seeing a time where there were no small appearances of a divine work among some, and a considerable _ingathering_ of souls, even after I was settled with him in the _ministry_, which was about _two_ years before his death; and I have reason to _bless_ _God _for the great advantage I had by it. In these _two_ years there were nearly _twenty_ that Mr. Stoddard hoped to be savingly converted; but there was nothing of any general awakening. The greater part seemed to be at that time very insensible of the things of religion, and engaged in other cares and pursuits. Just after my grandfather’s death, it seemed to be a time of extraordinary dullness in religion. _Licentiousness_ for some years prevailed among the _youth_ of the town; there were many of them very much addicted to _night-walking_, and frequenting the _tavern_, and _lewd_ practices, wherein some, by their example, exceedingly corrupted others. It was their manner very frequently to get together, in conventions of both _sexes_ for mirth and jollity, which they called _frolics_; and they would often spend the greater part of the night in them, without regard to any order in the families they belonged to: and indeed _family government_ did too much fail in the town. It was become very customary with many of our young people to be _indecent_ in their carriage at _meeting_, which doubtless would not have prevailed in such a degree, had it not been that my _grandfather_, through his great _age_ (though he retained his powers surprisingly to the last), was not so able to _observe_ them. There had also long prevailed in the town a spirit of contention between _two parties_, into which they had for many years been _divided_; by which they maintained a _jealousy_ one of the other, and were prepared to _oppose_ one another in all public affairs.

But in _two_ or _three _years after Mr. Stoddard’s death, there began to be a sensible amendment to these evils. The _young people_ showed more of a disposition to hearken to counsel, and by degrees left off their _frolics_; they grew observably more decent in their attendance on the public worship, and there were more who manifested a _religious concern_ than there used to be.

At the latter end of the year 1733, there appeared a very unusual flexibleness, and yielding to advice, in our young people. It had been too long their manner to make the _evening after the sabbath_, It must be noted, that it has never been our manner, to observe the evening that follows the sabbath, but that which precedes it, as part of the holy time. and after our public _lecture_, to be especially the times of their _mirth_, and company-keeping. But a sermon was now preached on the sabbath before the lecture, to show the _evil tendency_ of the practice, and to persuade them to reform it; and it was urged on _heads_ of _families_ that it should be a thing _agreed_ upon among them, to govern their families, and keep their children at home, at these times. It was also more privately moved, that they should meet together the next day, in their several neighborhoods, to know each other’s minds; which was accordingly done, and the notion complied with throughout the town. But _parents_ found little or no occasion for the exercise of government in the case. The _young people_ declared themselves _convinced_ by what they had heard from the pulpit, and were willing of themselves to comply with the counsel that had been given: and it was _immediately_, and, I suppose, almost _universally_, complied with; and there was a thorough _reformation_ of these disorders thenceforward, which has continued ever since.

Presently after this, there began to appear a _remarkable religious concern_ at a little village belonging to the congregation called Pascommuck, where a few families were settled, at about three miles distance from the main body of the town. At this place, a number of persons seemed to be savingly wrought upon. In the April following, _anno_ 1734, there happened a very _sudden and awful death of a young man_ in the bloom of his youth; who being violently seized with a _pleurisy_, and taken immediately very _delirious_, died in about _two days_; which (together with what was preached publicly on that occasion) _much affected_ many young people. This was followed with another death of a young married woman, who had been considerably _exercised_ in mind, about the salvation of her _soul_, before she was ill, and was in great _distress _in the beginning of her illness; but seemed to have _satisfying evidences_ of God’s _mercy_ to her, before her death; so that she died very full of _comfort_, in a most earnest and moving manner _warning_ and counselling others. This seemed to _contribute_ to render solemn the spirits of many young persons; and there began evidently to appear more of a _religious concern_ on people’s minds.

In the fall of the year I proposed it to the _young people_, that they should agree among themselves to spend the _evenings after lectures_ in _social_ religion, and to that end divide themselves into several companies to meet in various parts of the town; which was accordingly done, and those meetings have been since continued, and the _example _imitated by _elder_ people. This was followed with the death of an _elderly person_, which was attended with many unusual circumstances, by which many were much moved and affected.

About this time began the great _noise_, in this part of the country, about _Arminianism_, which seemed to appear with a very threatening aspect upon the interest of religion here. The friends of vital piety trembled for fear of the issue; but it seemed, contrary to their fear, strongly to be _overruled_ for the promoting of religion. Many who looked on themselves as in a _Christless_ condition, seemed to be awakened by it, with fear that God was about to withdraw from the land, and that we should be given up to _heterodoxy_ and corrupt principles; and that then their _opportunity_ for obtaining salvation would be past. Many who were brought a little to _doubt_ about the _truth_ of the _doctrines_ they had hitherto been taught, seemed to have a kind of trembling fear with their doubts, lest they should be led into _by-paths_, to their eternal undoing; and they seemed, with much concern and engagedness of mind, to inquire what was indeed the way in which they must come to be accepted with God. There were some things said publicly on that occasion, concerning justification by faith alone.

Although great _fault_ was found with _meddling_ with the _controversy_ in the pulpit, by such a person, and at that time—and though it was ridiculed by many elsewhere—yet it proved a word spoken in season here; and was most evidently attended with a very remarkable _blessing _of heaven to the souls of the people in this town. They received thence a general satisfaction, with respect to the main thing in question, which they had been in trembling doubts and concern about; and their minds were engaged the more earnestly to seek that they might come to be accepted of God, and saved in the way of the gospel, which had been made evident to them to be the true and only way. And _then _it was, in the latter part of _December, that the Spirit of God _began extraordinarily to set in, and _wonderfully _to work amongst us; and there were, very _suddenly, _one after another, five or six persons, who were to all appearance savingly convened, and some of them wrought upon in a very remarkable manner.

Particularly, I was surprised with the relation of a _young woman, _who had been one of the greatest company-keepers in the whole town. When she came to me, I had never heard that she was become in any wise serious, but by the conversation I then had with her, it appeared to me, that what she gave an account of, was a glorious work of God’s infinite power and sovereign grace; and that God had given her a _new _heart, truly broken and sanctified. I could not then doubt of it, and have seen much in my acquaintance with her since to confirm it.

Though the work was _glorious, _yet I was filled with concern about the _effect _it might have upon others. I was ready to conclude, (though too rashly,) that some would be _hardened _by it, in carelessness and looseness of life; and would take occasion from it to open their mouths in _reproaches _of religion. But the _event _was the _reverse, _to a wonderful degree. God made it, I suppose, the _greatest _occasion _of awakening _to others, of any thing that ever came to pass in the town. I have had abundant opportunity to know the effect it had, by my private conversation with many. The news of it seemed to be almost like a _flash of lightning, _upon the hearts of young people, all over the town, and upon many others. Those persons amongst us, who used to be _furthest _from seriousness, and that I most feared would make an ill improvement of it, seemed greatly to be _awakened _with it. Many went to talk with her, concerning what she had met with: and what appeared in her seemed to be to the satisfaction of all that did so.

Presently upon this, a great and earnest concern about the great things of religion, and the eternal world, became _universal _in all parts of the town, and among persons of all degrees, and all ages. The noise amongst the _dry bones _waxed louder and louder; all other talk but about spiritual and eternal things, was soon thrown by; all the conversation, in all companies and upon all occasions, was upon these things only, unless so much as was necessary for people carrying on their ordinary secular business. Other discourse man of the things of religion, would scarcely be tolerated in any company. The minds of people were wonderfully taken off from the _world, _it was treated amongst us as a thing of very little consequence. They seemed to follow their worldly business, more as a part of their duty, than from any disposition they had to it; the _temptation _now seemed to lie on that hand, to _neglect _worldly affairs too much, and to spend too much time in the immediate exercise of religion. This was exceedingly misrepresented by reports that were spread in distant parts of the land, as though the people here had wholly thrown by all worldly business, and betook themselves entirely to reading and praying, and such like religious exercises.

But although people did not ordinarily neglect their worldly business; yet _religion _was with all sorts the great concern, and the _world _was a thing only by the bye. The only thing in their view was to get the kingdom of heaven, and every one appeared pressing into it. The engaged-ness of their hearts in this great concern could not _be hid, _it appeared in their very _countenances. _It then was a dreadful thing amongst us to lie out of Christ, in danger every day of dropping into hell; and what persons’ minds were intent upon, was to _escape for their lives, _and to _fly from wrath to come. _All would eagerly lay hold of opportunities for their souls; and were wont very often to meet together in private houses, for religious purposes: and such meetings when appointed were greatly thronged.

There was scarcely a single person in the town, old or young, left unconcerned about the great things of the eternal world. Those who were wont to be the vainest and loosest, and those who had been most disposed to think and speak slightly of vital and experimental religion, were now generally subject to great awakenings. And the work of _conversion _was carried on in a most _astonishing _manner, and increased more and more; souls did as it were come by flocks to Jesus Christ. From day to day, for many months together, might be seen evident instances of sinners brought _out of darkness into marvellous light, _and delivered _out of an horrible pit, and from the miry day, and set upon a rock, _with a _new song of praise to God in their mouths._

This work of God, as it was carried on, and the number of true saints multiplied, soon made a glorious alteration in the town: so that in the spring and summer following, _anno _1735, the town seemed to be full of the presence of God: it never was so full of _love, _nor _of joy, _and yet so full of distress, as it was then. There were remarkable tokens of God’s presence in almost every house. It was a time of joy in _families _on account of salvation being brought unto them; _parents _rejoicing over their children as new born, and _husbands _over their wives, and _wives _over their husbands. _The goings of God _were then _seen in his sanctuary. _God’s _day _was _a delight, _and his _tabernacles _were _amiable. _Our public assemblies were then beautiful: the congregation was _alive _in God’s service, every one earnestly intent on the public worship, every _hearer _eager to drink in the words of the _minister _as they came from his mouth; the assembly in general were, from time to time, in _tears _while the word was preached; _some _weeping with sorrow and distress, _others _with joy and love, _others _with pity and concern for the souls of their neighbours.

Our public _praises _were then greatly enlivened; God was then served in our _psalmody, _in some measure, in the _beauty of holiness. _It has been observable, that there has been scarce _any part _of divine worship, wherein good men amongst us have had _grace so drawn forth, _and their hearts _so lifted up _in the ways of God, as in _singing _his praises. Our congregation excelled all that ever I knew in the _external _part of the duty before, the men generally carrying regularly, and well, _three parts of music, _and the _women _a part by themselves; but now they were evidently wont to sing with _unusual elevation _of heart and voice, which made the duty pleasant indeed.

In all _companies, _on _other _days, on whatever _occasions _persons met together, _Christ _was to be heard of, and seen in the midst of them. Our _young people, _when they met, were wont to spend the time in “talking of the _excellency _and dying _love _of jesus christ, the glory of the way of _salvation, _the wonderful, free, and sovereign grace of God, his glorious work in the _conversion _of a soul, the _truth _and certainty of the great things of God’s word, the sweetness of the views of his _perfections, &c. _And even at _weddings, _which formerly were mere occasions of mirth and jollity, there was now no discourse of any thing but religion, arid no appearance of any but _spiritual mirth. _Those amongst us who had _been formerly converted, _were greatly enlivened, and renewed with fresh and extraordinary incomes of the Spirit of God; though some much more than others, _according to the measure of the gift of Christ. _Many who before had laboured under _difficulties _about their own state, had now their _doubts _removed by more satisfying experience, and more clear discoveries of God’s love.

When this work first appeared, and was so extraordinarily carried on amongst _us _in the winter, _others _round about us seemed not to know what to make of it. Many scoffed at and ridiculed it; and some compared what we called conversion, to certain _distempers. _But it was very observable of many, who occasionally came amongst us from abroad with disregardful hearts, that what they saw here cured them of such a temper of mind. _Strangers _were generally surprised to find things so much _beyond _what they had heard, and were wont to tell others that the state of the town could not be conceived of by those who had not seen it. The notice that was taken of it by the people who came to town on occasion of the _court _that sat here in the beginning of March, was very observable. And those who came from the neighbourhood to our public _lectures, _were for the most part remarkably affected. Many who came to town, on one occasion or other, had their consciences smitten, and awakened; and went home with wounded hearts, and with those impressions that never wore off till they had hopefully a saving issue; and those who before had serious thoughts, had their awakenings and convictions greatly increased. There were many instances of persons who came from abroad on visits, or on business, who had not been long here before, to all appearance, they were savingly wrought upon; and partook of that shower of divine blessing which God rained down here, and went home rejoicing; till at length the _same work _began evidently to appear and prevail in several other towns in the _county._

In the month of March, the people in _South-Hadley _begun to be seized with deep concern about the things of religion; which very soon became universal. The work of God has been very wonderful _there_; not much, if any thing, short of what it has been here, in proportion to the size of the place. About the same time, it began to break forth in the west part of _Suffield, _(where it also has been very great,) and it soon spread into all parts of the town. It next appeared at _Sunderland, _and soon overspread the town: and I believe was, for a season, not less remarkable than it was here. About the same time it began to appear in a part of _Deerfield, _called _Green River, _and afterwards filled the town, and there has been a _glorious _work there. It began also to be manifest, in the south part of _Hatfield, _in a place called the _Hill, _and the _whole, town, _in the second week in April, seemed to be seized, as it were at once, with concern about the things of religion; and the work of God has been _great _there. There has been also a very general awakening at _West-Springfield, _and _Long Meadow_; and in _Enfield _there was for a time a pretty general concern amongst some who before had been very loose persons. About the same time that this appeared at _Enfield, _the Rev. Mr. Bull, of _Westfield, _informed me, that there had been a great alteration _there, _and that more had been done in _one week, _than in _seven years _before. Something of this work likewise appeared in the first precinct in _Springfield, _principally in the north and south extremes of the parish. And in _Hadley _old town, there gradually appeared so much of a work of God on souls, as at another time would have been thought worthy of much notice. For a _short _time there was also a very great and general concern, of the like nature, at _Northfield. _And wherever this concern appeared, it seemed not to be _in vain_: but in every place God brought saving blessings with him, and his _word _attended with his _Spirit _(as we have all reason to think) returned _not void. _It might well be said at that time, in all parts of the county, _who_ _are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their windows_?

As what _other _towns heard of and found in this, was a great means of awakening _them_; so _our _hearing of such a swift and extraordinary propagation, and extent of this work, did doubtless for a time serve to uphold the work amongst us. The continual news kept alive the talk of religion, and did greatly quicken and rejoice the hearts of God’s people, and much awakened those who looked on themselves as still _left behind, _and made them the more earnest that they also might _share _in the great blessings that others had obtained.

This remarkable _pouring out of the Spirit of God, _which thus extended from one end to the other of this county, was not confined to it, but many places in Connecticut have partaken in the same mercy. For instance, the first parish in Windsor, under the pastoral care of the Rev. Mr. Marsh, was thus blest about the same time as we in Northampton, while we had _no knowledge _of each other’s circumstances. There has been a very great ingathering of souls to _Christ _in that place, and something considerable of the same work begun afterwards in East Windsor, my honoured father’s parish, which has in _times past _been a place favoured with mercies of this nature, _above any _on this western side of New England, excepting Northampton; there having been _four or five _seasons of the _pouring out of the Spirit _to the _general _awakening of the people there, since my father’s settlement amongst them.

There was also the _last _spring and summer a wonderful work of God carried on at _Coventry, _under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Meacham. I had opportunity to converse with some Coventry people, who gave me a very remarkable account of the surprising _change _that appeared in the most rude and vicious persons there. The like was also very great at the same time in a part of Lebanon, called the _Crank, _where the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, a young gentleman, is lately settled: and there has been much of the same at Durham, under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Chauncey; and to appearance no small ingathering of souls there. Likewise amongst many of the young people in the first precinct in _Stratford, _under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Gould; where the work was much promoted by the remarkable conversion of a young woman who had been a great company-keeper, as it was here.

Something of this work appeared in several other _towns _in those parts, as I was informed when I was there, the last _fall _And we have since been acquainted with something very remarkable of this nature at another parish in Stratford, called _Ripton, _under the pastoral care of the Rev. Mr. Mills. There was a considerable revival of religion last summer at _Newhaven _old town, as I was once and again informed by the Rev. Mr. Noyes, the minister there, and by others: and by a letter which I very lately received from Mr. Noyes, and also by information we have had other ways. This flourishing of religion still continues, and has lately much increased. Mr. Noyes writes, that _many this summer have been added to the church, _and particularly mentions several young persons that belong to the principal families of that town.

There has been a degree of the same work at a part of _Guildford_; and very considerable at _Mansfield, _under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Eleazar Williams; and an unusual religious concern at _Tolland_; and something of it at _Hebron, _and _Bolton. _There was also no small effusion of the Spirit of God in the north parish in _Preston, _in the eastern part of Connecticut, of which I was informed, and saw something, when I was the last autumn at the house, and in the congregation of the Rev. Mr. Lord, the minister there; who, with the Rev. Mr. Owen, of Groton, came up hither in May, the last year, on purpose to see the work of God. Having heard various and contradictory accounts of it, they were careful when here to satisfy themselves; and to that end particularly conversed with many of our people; which they declared to be entirely to their satisfaction; and that the _one half had not been told them, _nor could be told them. Mr. Lord told me that, when he got home, he informed his congregation of what he had seen, and that they were greatly affected with it; and that it proved the beginning of the same work amongst them, which prevailed till there was a _general _awakening, and many instances of persons, who seemed to be remarkably converted. I also have lately heard that there has been something of the work at _Woodbury._

But this shower of divine blessing has been yet more _extensive_: there was no small degree of it in some part of the _Jerseys_; as I was informed when I was at New York, (in a long journey I took at that time of the year for my health,) by some people of the Jerseys, whom I saw. Especially the Rev. William Tennent, a minister who seemed to have such things much at heart, told me of a very great awakening of many in a place called the _Mountains, _under the ministry of one Mr. Cross; and of a very considerable revival of religion in another place under the ministry of his brother the Rev. Gilbert Tennent; and also at another place, under the ministry of a very pious young gentleman, a Dutch minister, whose name as I remember was Freelinghousa.

This seems to have been a very _extraordinary _dispensation of providence; God has in many respects gone out of, and much beyond, his usual and _ordinary way. _The work in this town, and some others about us, has been extraordinary on account of the _universality _of it, affecting all sorts, sober and vicious, high and low, rich and poor, wise and unwise. It reached the most considerable families and persons, to all appearance, as much as others. In former stirrings of this nature, the bulk of the _young _people have been greatly affected; but _old men _and _little children _have been so now. Many of the _last _have, of their own accord, formed themselves into _religious societies, _in different parts of the town. A loose careless person could scarcely be found in the whole neighbourhood; and if there was _any one _that seemed to remain senseless or unconcerned, it would be spoken of as a _strange _thing.

This dispensation has also appeared very extraordinary in the _numbers _of those on whom we have reason to hope it has had a saving effect. We have about _six hundred and twenty communicants, _which include almost all our adult persons. The church was very _large _before; but persons never _thronged _into it, as they did in the late extraordinary time.—Our _sacraments _are eight weeks asunder, and I received into our communion about a _hundred _before one sacrament, _fourscore _of them at one time, whose appearance, when they presented themselves together to make an open explicit _profession _of Christianity, was very affecting to the congregation. I took in near _sixty _before the next sacrament day: and I had very sufficient evidence of the conversion of their souls, through divine grace, though it is not the custom here, as it is in many other churches in this country, to make a credible relation of their inward experiences the ground of admission to the Lord’s supper.

I am far from pretending to be able to determine how many have lately been the subjects of such mercy; but if I may be allowed to declare any thing that appears to me probable in a thing of this nature, I hope that more than 300 souls were savingly brought home to Christ, in this town, in the space of half a year, and about the same number of males as females. By what I have heard Mr. Stoddard say, this was far from what has been usual in years past; for he observed that in his time, many more women were converted than men. Those of our young people who are on other accounts most considerable, are mostly, as I hope, truly pious, and leading persons in the ways of religion. Those who were formerly loose young persons, are generally, to all appearance, become true lovers of God and Christ, and spiritual in their dispositions. I hope that by far the greater part of persons in this town, above sixteen years of age, are such as have the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. By what I have heard I suppose it is so in some other places; particularly at _Sunderland _and _South Hartley._

This has also appeared to be a very extraordinary dispensation, in that the Spirit of God has so much extended not only his _awakening, _but _regenerating _influences, both to _elderly _persons, and also to those who are _very young. _It has been heretofore rarely heard of, that _any _were converted past middle age; but now we have the same ground to think, that _many such _have at this time been savingly changed, as that _others _have been so in more early years. I suppose there were upwards of _fifty _persons converted in this town above forty years of age; more than _twenty _of them above fifty; about _ten _of them above sixty; and _two _of them above seventy years of age.

It has heretofore been looked on as a strange thing, when any have seemed to be savingly wrought upon and remarkably changed in their _childhood. _But now, I suppose, near _thirty _were, to appearance, savingly wrought upon, between ten and fourteen years of age; two between nine and ten, and _one _of about four years of age; and because I suppose this last will be with most difficulty believed, I will hereafter give a particular account of it. The influences of God’s Holy Spirit have also been very remarkable on children in some _other _places; particularly at _Sunderland, South Hadley, _and the west part of _Suffield. _There are several _families _in this town who are _all _hopefully pious. Yea, there are several numerous families, in which, I think, we have reason to hope that all the children are truly godly, and most of them lately become so. There are very few _houses _in the whole town, into which salvation has not lately come, in one or more instances. There are several _negroes, _who from what was seen in them then, and what is discernible in them since, appear to have been truly born again in the late remarkable season.

God has also seemed to have gone out of his usual way, in the _quickness _of his work, and the swift progress His Spirit has made in his operations on the hearts of many. It is wonderful that persons should be so _suddenly, _and yet so _greatly _changed. Many have been taken from a loose and careless way of living, and seized with strong convictions of their guilt and misery, and in a very little time old things have passed away, and all things have become new with them.

God’s work has also appeared very extraordinary in the _degrees _of his influences; in the degrees both of _awakening _and conviction, and also of _saving light, love_, and _joy, _that many have experienced. It has also been very extraordinary in the _extent _of it, and its being so swiftly propagated from town to town. In former times of the pouring out of the Spirit of God on this town, though in some of them it was very remarkable, it reached no further then, the neighbouring towns all around continued unmoved.

This work seemed to be at its greatest height in this town, in the former part of the spring, in March and April. At that time, God’s work in the conversion of souls was carried on amongst us in so wonderful a manner, that, so far as I can judge, it appears to have been at the rate, at least, of four persons in a day; or near thirty in a week, take one with another, for five or six weeks together. When God in so remarkable a manner took the work into his own hands, there was as much done in a _day or two _as at ordinary times, with all endeavours that men can use, and with such a blessing as we commonly have, is done in a _year._

I am very sensible, how apt many would be, if they should see the account I have here given, presently to think with themselves that I am very fond of making a great many converts, and of magnifying the matter; and to think that, for want of judgment, I take every religious pang, and enthusiastic conceit, for saving conversion. I do not much wonder, if they should be apt to think so; and, for this reason, I have forborne to publish an account of this great work of God, though I have often been solicited. But having now a special call to give an account of it, upon mature consideration I thought it might not be beside my duty to declare this amazing work, as it appeared to me to be indeed divine, and to conceal no part of the glory of it; leaving it with God to take care

of the credit of his own work, and running the venture of any censorious thoughts, which might be entertained of me to my disadvantage. That _distant _persons may be under as great advantage as may be to judge for themselves of this matter, I would be a little more large and particular.
